Muti was at the root of a punch-up between Maritzburg United staff and a Bloemfontein Celtic official during last Friday’s game at Harry Gwala stadium, United chairman Farook Kadodia said on Monday. The Team of Choice came from two goals down to secure a late 2-2 draw against Siwelele. The fight broke out at half time when two of United’s backroom staff repeatedly punched Celtic official Aaron Makgalane while United’s supporters cheered in jubilation. With the score 0-0 at half time, Makgalane went to the United penalty area apparently to plant the muti and help Celtic to find the back of the net in order to win the match. The team from Free State did score and took a 2-0 lead until the last eight minutes of the game, which saw United bouncing back to secure a draw. “The reality is I didn’t see that incident because I was in the dressing room at half time and when I came back, I was told by the fans sitting in front of me that the Celtic muti man was on the ground using his muti ... and that our guys pulled him, and our guys or somebody else did hit him,” said Kadodia. He condemned his officials beating people, but said Celtic need to behave in a proper manner as well. “It was totally uncalled for [the beating of Makgalane], but the reality is the Celtic official had no reason to go and provoke the crowd because to most people, especially in the African culture, muti is a very strong subject,” said Kadodia. “It was completely out of order and obviously my guys’ emotions were running high and they lost their cool. We can’t condone such behaviour from both teams, Celtic and Maritzburg. “Clubs should be acting in a proper manner and if they want to do something with muti they must do it privately, in their own space. “You can’t come and do that on the field, especially in the opposition’s ground. Obviously, you are going to provoke people. I will be talking to them [Maritzburg officials], just to make sure that if it happens again, they should hand over the guy to the police,” said Kadodia. Celtic’s public relations officer Sello Nduna said he heard about the incident but couldn’t comment on Monday as he was yet to meet the club officials who travelled with the team to Pietermaritzburg and get the incident report.