There were chaotic scenes at a Glenwood home as an emotional mother demanded answers from two Mountain Rise police station constables who had allegedly assaulted her son on Monday morning. The infuriated mother, Rommona Marais, said she got the shock of her life when her traumatised son, Tevin (22), called her after he managed to escape following the alleged assault by the two officers in the sugar­cane plantation in Tamboville. Marais said on Saturday her son was involved in a physical altercation with one of the officers, who was not on duty at the time, who also stays in Glenwood. “One of Tevin’s friends was robbed at the shop nearby and there ended up being a fight between Tevin and other boys, including one of the officers who assaulted him this morning. He was off duty when that happened.” Marais said while Tevin was working at the taxi rank in Tamboville, the officer from Glenwood and a colleague, both in uniform, came to him and instructed him to get into their police van. “Tevin complied thinking he was being arrested or was being taken in for questioning. Instead of driving to the police station, the officers drove to a sugar­cane plantation where they forced him out of the van, dragged him into the plantation and started kicking and strangling him,” said Marais. She said Tevin managed to escape and ran into a house in Tamboville, from where he called her. “I panicked and left work without even reporting where I was going,” said the distressed mother. She said she got there and took Tevin home and the two officers followed them later. When The Witness arrived at the home, the irate mother was shouting at one of the officers, who was seated on the sofa. She was demanded answers from him. After several requests by the officer to speak in the bedroom away from the reporter, the officer admitted to having assaulted Tevin and apologised to Marais. “It was a misunderstanding and I am sorry Ma. I also told Tevin that I am sorry and will sort him out. I’m sorry,” said the officer. Marais went outside, where the other officer was waiting, and started kicking, punching and grabbing the officer. Her neighbours who had gathered on her yard intervened and managed to pull her off the policeman. Marais told The Witness that on Monday afternoon the two officers had taken Tevin to Midlands Hospital and offered to pay his medical bills. She said they also offered to pay Tevin R4 000 “to settle the matter”. “I am very angry about what these boys did to my son. I want to forgive them because they apologised but I also want to report them so that they never do this again. “Why are they abusing their police uniforms and using it to harass and assault people? That’s not right,” she said. Marais said Tevin was in a lot of pain and they suspect that one of his arms was broken. She added that she was planning on laying charges against the two officers. Warrant officer Joshua Maistry, Mountain Rise police station’s spokesperson, said according to SAPS Mountain Rise station management, the complainant (Tevin) in this matter must open a criminal case so that disciplinary actions can be taken against the officers. “Police will not condone this type of action by any member,” said Maistry.