Retailers across the city are bracing themselves for a frenzied rush to their stores on Friday for the so-called Black Friday discount bonanza. Most are unpacking additional stock, and hiring extra staff and security in anticipation of a buying crowd expected to descend on their shops from as early as midnight on Thursday night. Retailers like Pick n Pay, Shoprite, Checkers, Makro and Game are ready with crowd control measures to prevent stampedes and chaos. At the Liberty Midlands Mall, Game, Pick n Pay and Mr Price Weekend will open at midnight. The mall will be open for general shopping from 7 am until 9 pm. While Cascades Mall will operate normal shopping hours from 9 am to 6 pm, Checkers will open at 8 am. Pietermaritzburg Makro will also be operating normal trading hours. A manager at Checkers at the Scottsville Mall said: “All tills are fully operational and additional security has been employed to help with crowd control, to maintain orderly queues both inside and outside the stores. Doors will also be temporarily closed when the maximum number of customers are inside.” King Naidoo, store manager at Game in the CBD, said: “We have steel barricades to prevent a stampede. When the doors open most people run in and we want to prevent any injuries. We have even removed our sensors at the front, so people don’t run into them.” Naidoo said they will also be increasing their normal security complement. “Being in the CBD, it’s hard for people to follow a line to come in. They all rush in one time and we only control the payments queue.” Christele Chokossa, senior analyst at Euromonitor International, a market research provider, said South Africans are more interested in getting a deal from a “wish list” of products they otherwise couldn’t afford, or are willing to purchase at a specific price range. “As a result, discretionary goods like electronics and appliances, home furniture, apparel and footwear, as well as personal care products are likely to create more traction on the day.” Debt Rescue CEO Neil Roets advised shoppers to make a budget to ensure that they do not spend more money than they have.