The Democratic Alliance has expressed their disapproval after former Msunduzi mayor Zanele Hlatshwayo, who presided over the near collapse of the municipality, was recommended by the parliamentary subcommittee to be appointed as the Commissioner for the National Public Service Commission (PSC). Hlatshwayo, who is the provincial Health Department’s manager of youth, gender and transformation, was removed from Msunduzi when the municipality faced bankruptcy in 2010. The parliamentary portfolio committee on public service and administration announced earlier this month that Hlatswayo was one of the nine shortlisted candidates out of the 172 applications they had received. The appointed candidate has not been announced yet, but the DA’s shadow minister for Public Service and Administration, MP Leon Schreiber, said Hlatshwayo’s proposed appointment was the ANC’s attempt to “capture” the Public Service Commission (PSC). In a statement, Schreiber said despite vociferous opposition from the DA, the ANC used its majority in the parliamentary subcommittee to force through the proposed appointment of “ANC cadre Zanele Hlatshwayo” as a PSC commissioner. “In her time as ANC mayor of Msunduzi, Hlatshwayo systematically destroyed the municipality. By 2010, even the ANC had had enough. “They removed Hlatshwayo from her mayoralty and placed the collapsed municipality under administration. But because the party lives in an accountability-free universe, the ANC immediately and immorally deployed this incompetent cadre to the KZN Health Department, where the government continued to pay her millions in taxpayer monies for the past eight years,” said Schreiber. He said the ANC was now determined to use Hlatshwayo to capture the PSC, where she will be paid more than R1,5 million per year. Schreiber said as a “proven incompetent and partisan political deployee”, Hlatshwayo belongs nowhere near South Africa’s most important independent public service watchdog. He said instead of Hlatshwayo, the DA recommends the appointment of Kevin Malunga, the current deputy public protector. Responding to the DA’s statement, Hlatshwayo said, “There was no evidence showing any wrongdoings on my side. Investigations were done and to this day I have not been told of the findings, so I don’t know why the DA is getting so worked up. “If the DA has any finding that confirm that I am indeed unfit as they claim, I would be happy if they can share this with me because I am not aware of anything,” said Hlatshwayo.