A Mountain Rise family were overjoyed to be reunited with their dog, Cloé, after she was stolen from their yard on Friday afternoon. The dog’s owner, Jeremiah Pillay, told The Witness that a Northdale woman was arrested on Tuesday after she was found in possession of their seven-month-old Siberian Husky. The family, however, later decided to withdraw the charges against the woman. Pillay said they had bought the dog about five months ago from a friend for R4 000. He told The Witness they realised that Cloé was missing at around 4 pm on Friday. “We started looking for the dog and one of our neighbours said he saw two men jumping over our fence earlier that day.” Pillay said they spent the whole weekend looking for the dog and even posted pictures of it on social media networks, offering a reward to anyone with information on its whereabouts. “My girlfriend posted a picture of the dog on her WhatsApp status and a friend of hers responded with a picture of Cloé asking if this was our dog. It was easy to see that it was Cloé because she has a small scar near her eye,” he said. Pillay said they went to the friend’s house on Tuesday to ask her where the dog was. He said at first the friend was reluctant to tell them where the dog was, so they had to go and report the matter to the police. “We came back with the police and the friend took us to a house on Bombay Road in Northdale where our dog was. A woman was arrested for being in possession of a stolen dog, but we later decided to drop the charges because she apologised and said she was not aware that the dog was stolen.” Pillay said the woman told them that she had bought the dog for R800 from a neatly dressed man at a marketplace in Northdale. The woman had five other dogs in her yard. The family said the woman has been calling them demanding that they reimburse her the R800 she spent buying Cloé from the unknown man. They said two other dogs belonging to another neighbour were stolen in the area a few days before Cloé went missing. “My family is very attached to the dog, so we are all just happy that we found her alive and well,” said Pillay. “I just also want to thank everyone who helped us look for Cloé and shared our posts, we highly appreciate it. “The police were also very helpful because they helped us find Cloé and bring her home.”