Jacob Zuma’s pastor, Bishop Timothy Ngcobo, who was placed under surveillance by KZN police following xe-nophobic statements, has been arrested for illegally invading land. According to sources within the police, Ngcobo, who is also the founder of the African Freedom Revolution (AFR) political party, was caught in the Hazelmere Dam area. “Police have been investigating him for a spate of land invasions that have been taking place in various parts of the North Coast in recent months. “He was arrested alongside a group of other people who have attempted to invade farms in the Hazelmere Dam area,” the source said. Ngcobo, who briefly appeared in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court on Tuesday, has been released on R1 000 bail and will be back in court on December 8. Ngcobo is known for praying for Zuma at court during the former president’s court appearances in Durban and Pietermaritzburg in connection with the arms deal corruption charges dating back to the 1990s. In September The Witness reported that Ngcobo, who is also the provincial secretary of the National Interfaith Council of South Africa, was put under surveillance by the provincial police crime intelligence unit for “inflammatory statements” which investigators believed were designed to incite xenophobic violence. Contacted for comment on Thursday, Ngcobo confirmed his arrest. “However, it is not true that I was involved in land invasion. We had gone to that area to perform rituals as some of the graves of our ancestors are on the portions of land in those farms. “As we were negotiating with people who were on the property to be allowed to visit the graves, police arrived and arrested us,” he said. Ngcobo made it clear that his organisation, AFR, was at the forefront of a campaign to “return” people who have been forcibly removed from their homes during the colonial era, to their “ancestral homes”. “No, no, these things happening now about the court and arrests won’t stop that campaign. We have been working with communities, particularly in areas such as Verulam and Tongaat, who have been evicted from the land of their forefathers. “What we have also picked up is that most of the people who have taken over their land don’t even have title deeds for the property and yet they get us arrested when we try to visit the graves of our ancestors,” he said. According to police sources, Ngcobo had been put under surveillance after former community safety MEC Mxolisi Kaunda, who was recently elected eThekwini mayor, complained that statements and social media messages sent out by Ngcobo had the potential to cause public unrest. The statements, which were posted on AFR’s social media platforms, were being circulated at the height of the September xenophobic attacks in Gauteng. Ngcobo, who was interviewed by several media houses, including Cape Talk radio, over his statements, was unapologetic, calling for all foreign nationals operating tuckshops in townships and rural areas to be sent back to their countries.