A Woodlands woman is recuperating at home after she was attacked by stray dogs while walking home recently. Melony Anderson (23) said she was shocked when two dogs charged at her and started biting her all over her body. Anderson said she had been walking along Peach Road after visiting a friend when the incident happened, causing her to land up in hospital for treatment to bite wounds in her stomach area, on her buttocks and thighs. The Witness previously reported that residents in the northern suburbs had called for the immediate removal of stray dogs which they said were terrorising the community there. “The dogs were all over me. I was crying and screaming for help. I thought I was going to die,” said Anderson. “One of the residents heard me screaming and came out. He hit the dogs with the sticks, and they ran away. I was bleeding, and I was very scared. It took me very long to calm down after the dogs were chased away,” she said. Anderson said she went to the police station to report the incident but the case could not be registered as she did not know who owned the dogs. “I’m not sure who the dogs belong to. Although the man who chased the dogs away said he knew the owners, he has since declined to give any statements to the police after receiving threats,” she said. “Roaming dogs in the area are a serious concern. The same dogs that bit me have attacked other people in the past. We have been complaining but nothing is being done about the stray dogs in the area. “We are still wondering who is next because those dogs have become the kings of this area. “I’m still very traumatised ...” said Anderson. A spokesperson for the National SPCA, Janette Muller, said when it comes to dogs attacking people, the owners can be charged under the Animal Amendment Act and she has seen many successful prosecutions. She added that it has to be proved that the owner was negligent. Muller said people who lay charges against the owners of dogs involved in attacks must follow up on the investigations. Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha did not respond to questions relating to municipal bylaws for dog owners. However, general by-laws dated September 2012 on the City’s website state that keeping “any wild or ferocious animal” is not allowed and, if necessary, the animal could be “destroyed by an authorised official” in the name of safety.