Newly crowned World Boxing Federation All Africa
Bantamweight champion Sanele Magwaza (pictured) hopes his surprisingly
immediate success in boxing will encourage more youngsters, especially from the
rural areas of KwaZulu-Natal, to join the sport. The 24-year-old, who hails from Kwa­Dukuza, north of Durban,
defeated Enathi Stelle after the two boxers went toe-to-toe for the entire 10
scheduled rounds in Port Elizabeth at the weekend. The win over Stelle meant Magwaza is still undefeated since
turning professional in March last year, with a record of five victories,
including two knockout wins. The continental title was vacant before the bout and it now
gives Magwaza a chance to challenge for other international titles. Growing up in the dusty Doringkop area in KwaDukuza, Magwaza
always believed he was going to be a champion one day, but he never thought it
would happen in less than two years after becoming professional. “To be honest, I’ve always dreamt of being a champion but
not for one moment I thought I would be a champion so soon,” said the excited
Magwaza. “But I think hearing people always telling me that I’m a
talented boxer and that I have a bright future in the sport whenever they see
me fight really motivated me. And that fight [against Stelle] was not easy,
probably my toughest match to date, but there was no way I was going to lose it
because being a champion is all I’ve been dreaming of. “I’m very happy and proud considering where I come from, in
a poverty-stricken village.” It’s a known fact that boxing is not what it used be back in
the days, with a lot of factors contributing to its demise over the years. Magwaza, who got involved in the sport at an early age back
in his village, hopes youngsters will take the sport seriously as that’s the
only way boxing can gain prominence again. “This a beautiful opportunity to show young people,
especially in the rural areas, that they mustn’t look at their background and
think they are not going to make it.  “They must be patient and keep working on their goals, and
trust in God is very important,” said Magwaza, who is under Aphile Boxing
Promotions. 