A dangerous fad is on the rise. Parents and caregivers have been warned to hide household
products like aerosols sprays, paint thinners, cooking spray, markers and nail
polish remover as “huffing” is said to be growing in popularity. Huffing, which is slang for inhaling chemical vapours —
often household goods — for a “buzz”, is on the increase and a significant
number of youngsters in the city are already hooked. Experts say street children are not the only ones sniffing
inhalants — it is becoming a dangerous practice among teens across social
classes. According to the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse (Sanca) website, huffing causes a sense of euphoria that lasts about 15
to 45 minutes. But Pietermaritzburg-based general practitioner Sihle
Ngobese has warned that users run the risk of sinus blockage, a desensitised
sense of smell, blockage to the lungs and in the long run, cancer. “It should not be taken lightly,” Ngobese said. “It can be
addictive. If too much is inhaled, it can also cause nausea and
light-headedness. It should be avoided. If parents suspect their children are
huffing, they should try and find out what had led to it and try and stop it.” Last week, Netwerk 24 reported that one of the country’s top
schools in the Western Cape had been shaken by rumours of huffing by some of
its pupils. The report alleged that some rugby players had engaged in
huffing while at a rugby tournament in Kimberly. It was allegedly also done by
some of the players at their hostel in George. Addiction psychotherapist Ayo Fatokun said the inhalant
abuse rate was climbing among teenagers. He said although the problem has been around for many years,
peer pressure continued, leading more youngsters to experiment. Fatokun, a program director at Breakthrough Addiction
Recovery Centre, said many young people abuse inhalants because it is “cheaper”
than alcohol and also “easily accessible”. “Experimenting with inhalants can be fatal the first time
you try it. “It induces irregular and rapid heart rhythms and this can
lead to heart failure and death within minutes of experimenting. This is known
as ‘sudden sniffing death’,” Fatokun said. In 2011, a KZN pupil apparently had a heart attack after
inhaling aerosol. The incident happened when the 15-year-old Grade 9 pupil was
attending a sleepover at a friend’s house. “The growing trend is concerning and there’s quite a
significant number of pupils who are addicted that have been referred to
government facilities for help. “All parents should be wary of where they household products
and monitor their usage by their children. “If you know that your child is misusing, as a family you
should approach a professional to help your child understand their addiction,
and work through it,” said Fatokun. Another drug abuse expert in the city, who asked to remain
unnamed, said considering the age of most inhalants abusers, the side effects
were dire. “The human brain is not fully developed until the age of 21.
If you are inhaling, you are actually changing the neuro-pathways in the brain
to become an addict ...” the expert warned. She added that huffing required the abuser to go through a
period of medically-supervised withdrawal when trying to quit.