Think you’re living a sugar-free lifestyle? Think again. While you may have cut out all the refined sugars found in
sweet treats, like chocolates and fizzy drinks, experts have said the concept
of a sugar-free diet is “virtually impossible”. A “sugar-free diet” is also unnecessary when it comes to
leading a healthy life. Experts say there are now more sugar-free products on the
market than ever before. An increase in health awareness has also added to the idea
of going sugar-free. However, we do need natural sugars to keep a balanced diet
and these usually come in the form of carbohydrate-type foods. Of the total glucose levels in our body, 33% is used by
“insulin non-responsive tissue such as the brain and red blood cells”. This is according to Professor Shahidul Islam of the
University of KwaZulu-Natal’s school of life sciences, biochemistry, genetics
and microbiology. Islam specialises in biochemistry, nutritional biochemistry,
diabetes, obesity, nutrition and food science. He said because our bodies already contain glucose, a high
sugar diet means the concentration of glucose in the blood will make the blood
a lot thicker, making it impossible to reach the fine and narrow blood vessels
of, e.g. the eyes, kidney and brain, and eventually these organs will be
affected. However, with the number of “zero-sugar” fizzy cooldrinks,
chocolates, biscuits and cereals on our supermarket shelves, it has become much
easier to avoid excessive sugar and be healthy. Islam said the use of sugar replacers is expanding very
rapidly in a host of different ranges of products from soft drinks to baked
goods and ice cream. Years ago, sugar-free products for people suffering from
diabetes were considered by many to be “bland” or “downright disgusting”,
however, the market is changing and sugar-free goodies are more delicious than
one would think. Hilton Quarry SuperSpar is only one example of a store
stocking various sugar-free products.  Happy dad Tawe Mbanjwa lets his son Kelo (5) pick out some sugar-free sweets at the Hilton Quarry SuperSpar on Thursday. Photo: Moeketsi  Mamane Store manager Sunil Mothilal said that although not all
stores follow the same policy, there will be other shops in the
Pietermaritzburg area with a similar range of sugar-free goodies. One would need to inquire from their local supermarket about
sugar-free products and if they are not available, ask if they would consider
stocking sugar-free treats. Mothilal said they started selling various brands of sugar-free
biscuits and recently started stocking sugar-free cereal. “The products have become popular among our regulars and are
definitely in demand,” he said. Weekend Witness staff decided to try different brands of
sugar-free sweets and were pleasantly surprised by their taste. UKZN’s Dr Kirthee Pillay, who specialises in human nutrition
and clinical dietetics, said that many foods that we think do not contain
sugar, actually have “hidden sugars”. She said people need to look at their food labels very
carefully to determine how much sugar is in the food they are about to buy. “People are more health conscious nowadays, so it’s become
easier to cut down on added sugars in the diet. “People have also become more aware of the dangers of
excessive sugar intake, so they find it easier to cut down.” Pillay said there are more sugar-free products available now
than ever before. “This may make it easier to reduce sugar intake. “Because of the regulations relating to the labelling and
advertising of food in South Africa, it’s become easier to identify products
that contain sugar.”  Sugar-free sweets are becoming more easily available in South African stores. Photo pixabay Senior registrar in the discipline of public health medicine
at UKZN, Dr Avashri Harrichandparsad, said, however, that making healthy food
choices shouldn’t be restricted to only sugar. Harrichandparsad said: “The approach to healthy eating
should rather be an integrated one.” Harrichandparsad said we should aim to reduce known key risk
factors such as salt, sugar and unhealthy fats, in our diets. While most people associate a high sugar diet with weight
gain, dental issues and problems with their skin, the long-lasting effects of a
consistent high sugar diet can be devastating. Heart disease, strokes, early onset of diabetes and obesity
are just some of the issues a high sugar diet can cause. He said the best alternatives to sugar-containing foods are
to choose fresh fruit and vegetables “as the sugar contained in these do not
have the same effects on a person’s health”. He added that these foods will also have a greater
nutritional value than processed foods. “Limit the amount of processed foods you eat as these
generally have a high sugar content. With any type of foods, fresh or
processed, eating in moderation is generally advisable,” he said. What are the dangers
of a high sugar diet and why should we cut back on sugar? Senior registrar in the discipline of public health medicine
at UKZN, Dr Avashri Harrichandparsad, said the main danger lies in “free
sugars”. These are sugars added to a product by the manufacturer
which increases its calorie content without increasing nutritional value. “The main source of free sugars in our diets is
sugar-sweetened beverages, which are consumed regularly by most individuals.” Harrichandparsad emphasised that high sugar diets in
children “are especially problematic”.  Sugar-free chocolates such as Nova Chocolate, Afrikoa, Caring Candies, Canderel  and some Nestle chocolates, are available in South  African stores. Photo pixabay Not only does sugar affect one’s physical health, it also
affects one’s mental health. University of KwaZulu-Natal’s school of life sciences,
biochemistry, genetics and microbiology’s Professor Shahidul Islam said high
sugar diets in children may affect their growth and brain function. “It has been found in research that brain activity of a
person who is overweight or obese is slower than a person who is at an average
weight for their gender, height and build. Children taking a high sugar diet
may have some other problems like dental caries, teeth and gum diseases if
proper oral hygiene has not been followed,” said Islam. Additionally, high blood sugar will increase stress and
damage cells and organs. “Higher sugar consumption may suddenly increase energy
levels for a person with a healthy diet but chronic consumption of high sugar
will have the opposite effects.” Pillay said a high sugar intake can affect mood and cause
increased feelings of sadness, anxiety and depression. “It can impair the ability to concentrate and may negatively
affect memory. Although it may initially cause an increase in energy levels due
to a spike in blood glucose levels, it can thereafter bring about a drop in
energy levels, leaving one with a feeling of fatigue and exhaustion,” she said. She said a high sugar intake in children may be linked to
depression and anxiety. “It can also affect attention span and learning ability, and
aggravate hyperactivity in children with ADHD [Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder]. It can also reduce immune function leading to an increased risk for
illnesses.” How can we create
awareness around the importance of a low sugar diet? Harrichandparsad said we still need to use refined
sugar  for a number of reasons but in
moderation. “Social media, news media, radio, 
television and newspapers can make a difference in promoting a low sugar
diet. “Having public policies supporting the production of food
and drink with lower sugar  content would
help. “In South Africa this includes the taxation on sugar-sweetened
beverages,  which was called the Health
Promotion Levy, launched in 2018. “This has resulted in soft-drink  companies reducing the sugar content of their
products. “Regulating the marketing of sugar-sweetened food and beverages is
also an example of a policy level intervention that could help make people lean
toward a healthier food choice.” He added that creating environments with more
healthy food outlets or grocery stores than fast-food outlets, would make it
easier for  individuals to make healthier
choices. “Making healthy choices more affordable is also key to creating an
enabling environment,” he said. What are the
alternatives to high sugar foods? Islam said many beverages on the market still have refined
sugars, including soft drinks and fruit juices. High sugar is also available in
most baked goods like cakes, muffins and biscuits, as well as jams, jellies,
ice cream, desserts and syrups. “It is always better to look at the labels of a product
before buying it to know exactly the sugar content.” However, there are a range of tasty zero-sugar products
available on South African supermarket stores. These include several chocolates and candies by Caring
Candies (the slogan is “no nasty stuff”), Afrikoa Chocolate, Canderel and
Nestle, and Amajoya has rolled out a range of sugar-free candies. Other products include Wild Earth Cereal, Gullón Biscuits
and Nestle’s Dialite ice cream. Even Pilsbury has brought out a few sugar-free baking
products. There are many other popular brands that are bringing out
sugar-free products. UKZN’s Dr Suna Kassier added that people must be aware that
pure fruit juices do not contain added sugar but are high in fruit sugar
(fructose) that is also linked to the developement of numerous chronic
(non-communicable) disease. “When drinking fruit juice, do so in moderation,” he said. Seven tips to help
cut out sugar 1. Take it slow Do it gradually. Let it be a slow process. Start by eliminating the most obvious sources of sugar like
cakes and biscuits, sweets and sugary drinks. Reduce the amount of sugar in
coffee or tea, gradually omitting it completely. Working up to a no-sugar diet
can help retrain the palate so you don’t crave sugar. 2. Read labels Once the most obvious sugar has been cut from your diet,
start reading the labels on grocery products to help identify the types of
sugars to avoid. Sugar has many names
and is in many different syrups and concentrates. There are at least 61
different names for sugar on food labels. The most common ones include: • cane sugar or brown sugar • corn syrup or high fructose corn syrup • evaporated cane juice • invert sugar • beet sugar • coconut sugar • maple syrup • agave syrup • rice syrup • apple or grape juice concentrate • honey • demerara • sucanat • panela or piloncillo • turbinado • muscovado • Anything ending in the suffix “-ose” is also a type of
sugar, like sucrose, glucose, dextrose, fructose and lactose. • Products such as salad dressing and condiments, pasta
sauce, breakfast cereals, milk and granola bars often have sugar in their
ingredients list. 3. Avoid simple carbs Many no-sugar diets also recommend that people avoid simple
carbohydrates. Simple carbs include white flour, white pasta and white rice. These can be broken down quickly into sugar in the body,
which may cause the blood sugar levels to spike. Replace simple carbs with
whole-grain options. 4. Avoid artificial sugars Artificial sugars are a subject of controversy in the diet
industry. They are much sweeter than sugar but contain little or no calories. However, eating artificial sugars can trick the body into
thinking it is actually eating sugar. This can exacerbate a person’s sugar
cravings, making it more difficult for them to stick to a no-sugar diet. A person on a no-sugar diet should avoid artificial
sweeteners. Look for the chemical names of these sweeteners in
ingredients lists, especially in anything marketed as a low-sugar, low-calorie
or diet food. These include: • aspartame • sucralose • saccharin • acesulfame k or acesulfame potassium • neotame 5. Focus on whole foods Aim to eat 100% whole foods. Processed foods are more likely
to contain refined ingredients or added sugars. Eat vegetables, fruits, lean meats, poultry or tofu, fish,
whole unprocessed grains and legumes, nuts and seeds. Some people may choose to keep a small amount of dairy in
their meal plans, such as plain yoghurt, simple cheeses and milk. 6. Plan your meals Sticking to a diet with no plan is difficult. When hunger
strikes, you’ll be more likely to reach for that unhealthy snack. Take a day to do shopping and meal preparation for the
entire week. With food at the ready, you’ll be less tempted to reach for sweets
or cool drinks. 7. Spice it up The palate often misses sugar because it has no other
flavours to replace it. Many sweet-tasting herbs and spices can easily be added to
food and drink to replace sugar. Common replacements include cinnamon, nutmeg, cardamom and
vanilla. These can be added to coffee or sprinkled on top of oats or
yogurt.  