KZN Premier Sihle Zikalala has announced a raft of measures
to end political killings, combat corruption and clamp down on elements
disrupting business operations in the province. Delivering his State of the Province Address (Sopa) in the
KwaZulu-Natal legislature on Friday, Zikalala singled out corruption as one of
the social ills that had to be defeated if the province is to prosper. “The KwaZulu-Natal Office of the Premier will work together
with civil society, the faith-based community and traditional leaders to lead
efforts to mobilise society in a campaign against this scourge, popularise
whistle-blowing and nurture a culture of a clean government,” he said. As part of the measures to root out corruption, the
provincial government would be setting up an anti-fraud and corruption hotline
and increasing security around senior government officials within the finance
and procurement units of departments and municipalities. “A panel will be set up to review all big contracts,”
Zikalala said. On the political killings, Zikalala said the provincial
government was in the process of finalising a plan to guide departments in the
implementation of recommendations made by the Moerane Commission that
investigated political assassinations in the province. “The recent unrest including killings, looting and burning
of trucks, disruption of business operations, and proliferation of drugs cannot
be tolerated within a society that intends to build a better life for its
people.” KZN, Zikalala said, has emerged from a painful history —
with violence in the 1990s claiming more than 20 000 lives. “We can never return to the shameful days of the so-called
‘black-on-black violence’. We cannot again be synonymous with the painful
memory of being known as the killing fields of South Africa,” he said. Amongst other things, the commission recommended that the
provincial government should take steps to ensure that councillors and other
political office bearers did not have any influence in the awarding of tenders. “We have already prepared a detailed implementation framework
to ensure that the recommendations are implemented by the various entities
listed in the report,” he said. On the economy, Zikalala said the provincial government will
increase its support to small businesses, invest into the province’s Special
Economic Zones in Durban and Richards Bay and develop programmes to grow the
province’s tourism industry.