So I’ve been sitting and pondering on how to actually begin
writing about my experiences teaching English as a second language in Taiwan so
far; so I’ll begin where I begin because beginnings happen everyday. My friends, who are native English teachers in Asia, had
told me so many stories about what it’s like being a black young woman in Asia. Most of them spoke on the expensive lifestyle one can fall
into, the culture shock and hair problems: “There are very limited and
expensive places to do your hair”, “You will miss the food at home”, “You may
find yourself overspending because there is just so much to see and do.” Just as I was started to admire the tall buildings, the
cleanliness of the streets, the scooter system and the huge number of 7-Eleven
stores, I was also feeling small, scared and worried that I had not seen one
black face walk by. I was beginning to feel like I didn’t belong; there were
just too many heads turning the minute I walked out of that hotel room. It was
worse on the streets! I remember when my training group (who have now become
friends) and I went to get our Taiwanese sim cards —  there was a man who
looked like he was taking a photo of us walking down the street. Only when I
went past him did I realise that he was actually taking a video, and I happened
to be walking in the front. My friends did warn me. They did say: “People will take
photos of/with you on the streets, and want to touch your hair.” I was ready
for that, or so I thought. You know, I can’t really explain the feeling when randoms
just take pictures of you and look so fascinated and marvel at how you were
created — the feeling of resembling a zoo animal ... thoughts of how my
ancestors felt when they were paraded and sold during slavery. I am not a tourist attraction; I’m a human being too. The worst day came when we were at a night market. I really
didn’t want to go because I knew I was going to turn heads. A part of me said I
should enjoy turning heads and being “famous”, but I didn’t like how the fame
was bestowed upon me. I was busy eating a kebab, or meat on a stick, some would
say. And just so you know, I still have no idea what animal I ate, but it was
very good. I turned around to find two grown men taking pictures of me
and smiling ridiculously. I was really so annoyed at their smirks, but decided
to give them a show; I smiled. They said thank you. They left. I wanted to die ... I
just acted like a zoo animal; perform for the people ... great show, they loved
you. I’m probably thinking way too much of this, but everybody is
entitled to their feelings and opinions. Just imagine walking in the street and
having people snap pictures and take videos of you walking, just walking. Now
imagine that everyday. You probably would also dread stepping out of your
apartment. What also sucked was going to Hong Kong, the capital fashion
of Asia, to have people do the same thing — stare and take pictures. I mean
Hong Kong is densely populated by foreigners (white people), at least where I
was (city central), but people still made me feel like a zoo animal. That didn’t stop me though, from exploring, getting lost and
asking directions. However, I still preferred my room to walking outside; maybe
I’m just an indoors type of person. Am I being too hard with my judgment of street journalists?
(I call them that because they are like paparazzi; very annoying. I still
wonder what they do with the pictures and videos they take. Maybe they also
blog “my first African encounter”, hahaha.) Well, what I do know is that I have not seen a black South
African take pictures of any Chinese* person walking the streets. It’s true, I
haven’t been everywhere in South Africa, but I am from the hood, and even with
low literacy levels, we don’t hype up and start snapping away. Maybe our
reasoning is due to the low levels of literacy, or the fact that not everyone
has a smartphone ... Nah. I do know that when I was 10 years old, and I saw my first
Chinese* human, I asked him if he knew karate. How ironic, haha. I guess it’s a similar thing you know, when they ask us
about HIV and living with lions, etc. (But I mean it’s only logical that lions
are wild animals so we can’t live with them because they would eat us — rolls
eyes and sighs.) But I was only 10. My mother (may her soul rest in peace)
and grandmother certainly have better things to do with their lives than take
pictures of Chinese* people. Heck! We see Chinese* people everywhere in town, and
Pakistanis — you can always get bargain prices for whatever you’re buying, and
that’s why we love them. Then there’s the bus that I take to and from work. This one
bus driver was so excited when he saw me, that he started making conversation,
but I had no idea what he was saying, and I honesty just wanted to sit down
because I could feel so many eyes on my shoulders. He was sweet though, just like that other guy who was
checking my visa at the airport (I should’ve asked for his number, he was
really cute, lol). But that’s another thing about Taiwan, besides the stares
and photographs, everybody is so generous and kind. Well, maybe they are generous and kind to me, but I would
also be super generous and kind to a cool traveller like myself. The weather! OMW the weather —  that’s a story for another
day. There’s just so much I want to write, but I won’t put it all
in one story. After all my venting is done, I will start writing about my
experiences in chronological order, why? So that all my venting can be pieced
together, and because I want to. Note: * I am at this point classifying all Taiwanese and
mainland China residents, as Chinese. • Vuyelwa Mtolo hails from Pietermaritzburg and, after a
year interning at The Witness, she is teaching English as a foreign language to
pupils in Taiwan.