A quick-thinking and vigilant Scottsville resident arrived in the nick of time to rescue his neighbour’s bull terrier from the clutches of men he believes could have been dog thieves. Wayne Nel, who lives on Rudling Road, stopped two men in their tracks after they had successfully lured a neighbour’s dog with polony on Tuesday morning. Nel said when he drove off Ritchie Road into Rudling Road, he noticed two men feeding the neighbour’s dogs polony and dragging a dog out of the yard. “These guys looked suspicious to me because I had never seen them in the area before. Their vehicle seemed suspicious … I had never seen it in the area or in front of my neighbour’s property before,” he said. The dog lover told The Witness that when he pulled over in front of the property, the two men already had the dog out of the yard but quickly threw it back into the yard when he confronted them. “When I started questioning them, they said they were not stealing the dog, they were just trying to get it to mate,” Nel said. He said the two men then attempted to flee but he called them back after threatening to call the police. “I said if they were not stealing the dogs, then they must come closer and we can have a chat,” Nel added. While the pair were walking towards him, Nel said one of the men put his hand under his t-shirt. Nel believed he was reaching for a weapon, but drew his firearm first and fired a warning shot. The two men ran off into nearby bush, leaving their vehicle behind. “They ran into the shrubbery at the back of the houses. I tried to catch them with no luck,” he added. “When I spoke to them, they had polony in their hands. You could see the dog had been drugged already by the way it was walking around.” Nel said he was convinced that the dogs were being stolen for Pietermaritzburg’s dark underworld of dog fighting. “I was shocked and then it hit me that they wanted to take the bull terrier for dog fighting,” he added. When The Witness visited the area on Tuesday, the white Toyota Corolla was still parked outside the property where the alleged attempted theft had happened. Slices of polony were also seen outside the property. A gardener, who asked to remain unnamed, said he had been watching the car. “I was watching them. They were moving from one property to the next. They parked in front of the property and when they noticed we were looking at them, they reversed and then went back again and parked in front of the gate,” the gardener said. Alexandra police station spokesperson Captain Kholeka Mhlongo said no case had been opened yet. Mhlongo said police were still trying to trace the two men. According to a police source, the vehicle owner was traced to the Woodlands area. This past weekend, Weekend Witness reported that well-connected sources in the dog fighting rings in the city confirmed illegal dog fighting was a growing phenomenon. A source who spoke to Weekend Witness said that money wagered ranged from R300 to about R25 000.