Tiger, a three-year-old pitbull, “without an aggressive bone in his body” was found alive but severely injured due to what is believed to be illegal dog fighting in the area. Tiger had been missing for three weeks before he was found at a small property not far from where he lived with “at least 14 other dogs chained and appearing to be in a worse condition” than Tiger. Tiger’s owners, Copesville couple Natasha and Riyadh Ally, said Tiger had escaped from their yard three weeks ago. “We spread the information on social media and sent out flyers and posters in the hopes we would find him,” said Natasha. She said they had shown the flyer to a number of people working and living in the Copesville area, hoping that someone would have seen their beloved pet or would recognise him if he was seen. “Tiger is not a vicious dog. He is part of the family and is treated as such. He is just not aggressive.” Natasha’s husband, Riyadh, said a person came to the couple on Saturday morning to tell them Tiger had been spotted tied up in a small property somewhere in the area. Natasha’s father, Anad Chetty, and Riyadh immediately went out to look for him. “We found him with around 14 other dogs, tied up in a small space. The other dogs were in a much worse condition than he was,” said Riyadh. He said there was no one on the property and so they started calling for Tiger. “He couldn’t even walk. He clawed his way out of this small, dirty room on the property and crawled towards us. He collapsed in my cousin’s arms,” he said. “He had bite wounds all over his face and neck. His front leg and his face are badly swollen and he is just skin and bones compared to what he looked like before he went missing. “We are so lucky we found him and that he is still alive.” Tiger is recovering from his three-week ordeal and is receiving treatment for his many wounds, however, his owners are positive that he will make a full recovery. This incident coincidentally follows a Weekend Witness article about Pietermaritzburg’s dark underworld of dog fighting. A source well connected in the dog-fighting rings of Pietermaritzburg revealed to Weekend Witness that the “blood sport” is flourishing, especially in informal settings. The source also confirmed that dogs were often stolen from people’s yards by novices who do not have the money to buy their own fighting dogs. The dogs are often kept on a property separate from the residence of the dog fighter. The Pietermaritzburg SPCA is aware of the incident and treated Tiger on Monday for all his wounds.