A policeman arrested a week ago by the political killings task team was yesterday denied bail because he has a propensity to commit crimes, some of which were allegedly committed while he was already out on bail for kidnap and murder. Pietermaritzburg magistrate Chris van Vuuren found it is therefore not in the public interest to release Constable Zakhamuzi Makhaye on bail. Makhaye is attached to the Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Unit and has been a police officer for 12 years. It emerged during the opposed bail application that he faces a charge of kidnapping and murder in Durban. State prosecutor Rene Padayachee read out an affidavit by the investigating officer, Mashudu Ramaite, in which he said that Makhaye and three others are alleged to have kidnapped an Umhlanga businessman, Sikhumbuzo Mjwara, in August last year. They then took him to Pietermaritzburg and killed him. His body was found near the Azalea cemetery. Ramaite said that Makhaye is out on R3 000 bail for that case. While out on bail he allegedly committed the latest offences for which he was arrested — being in possession of an unlawful firearm and ammunition, and possession of 16 precious metals without a licence. He is also charged with defeating the ends of justice for being in possession of seven DNA exhibits that were supposed to have been sent for forensic testing. One of the exhibits was from a rape scene in New Hanover. The matter was withdrawn because of the lack of evidence. Ramaite said Makhaye was arrested at his home in Ashdown. He had refused to let the task team inside, saying he wanted local police to be present. The team had to force themselves into his house. Ramaite said police went there in the first place following information received that he was in possession of illegal firearms, which he was. Makhaye was unable to give a satisfactory explanation as to why he had the firearm. All he said was that it belonged to a captain at the Loop Street police station. Of the precious metals, he said that he got them from Harding. Ramaite said that if he was granted bail, Makhaye would endanger the safety of the public. “Firearms are used to commit serious crimes, therefore he can be considered as a danger to the public,” he said. He said Makhaye would continue with his illegal activities, interfere with the witnesses because he knows them, and evade trial.