Fed up with restrictive by-laws, high rates and  cultural intolerance, hundreds of
middle-class black families in Pietermaritzburg are abandoning affluent suburbs
and moving to tribal trust land. While the general trend is that some of them move from rural
areas to townships and then when they can afford to, move to the leafy suburbs,
the past few years has seen a steady influx of people moving back to land under
the control of amakhosi. Armed with unlimited cash, they have been responsible for a
string of luxury house with enormous price tags being built in Mpumuza,
Sweetwaters, and the outskirts of Vulindlela. The homes are valued in millions
of rands. Thinasonke Ntombela, induna of the Zondi clan, said the
land, which has beautiful views, was in demand. Ntombela said the chief plays an oversight role in the
process where he is given a khonza (homage) fee of R1 000. “This process is always followed when a person wants to
obtain land or a site in our community,” he said. “High municipal rates in the city and its unfriendly by-laws
have been the main reason for this demand. Another issue is the shortage of
burial land in the city, whereas, in rural areas, people can bury their
relatives in their backyards.” Ntombela said the area had attracted businessmen, attorneys,
teachers, and managers from various government departments. “Pensioners are opting for life in the rural areas. We have
had people leaving places like Ashburton, selling off their properties and
coming here to rebuild.” Democratic Alliance councillor Sibongiseni Majola attested
that hundreds of middle-class black families were abandoning the suburbs. “You can see that they are well off. They are building
houses worth millions. Even the appearance of areas like Mpumuza and
Sweetwaters has changed.” Majola said most of these residents were fed up with crime,
restrictive by-laws and high municipal rates. “The contributing factor within
Msunduzi is that with regards to water, they are not billed as per consumption,
but through the flat rate. They regard that as a relief instead of staying in
areas where they are billed in terms of consumption.” Bruce Campbell of Natal Property Consultants expressed
concern at the unrestricted home ownership. He said he had discovered “an
outstanding amount of development” in Pietermaritzburg and along Richmond Road,
which raised the problem of a lack of title deeds. “There is no ways I would
purchase a property without getting a title deed. A lot of the people put a lot
of trust in the chief or whoever is in charge of the area and they don’t seem
to mind that. I believe that is very dangerous unless there is a water tight
agreement.” Campbell said most of the buyers did not understand the
implications. “The lack of title deeds means people can’t have their
properties valued for resale nor could they become a means of future security
should the owners require collateral to raise loans. It also means these
properties are being built either for cash or via personal loans where the
interest rates were substantially higher than that for mortgages.” He questioned if any of the properties had been subjected to
building requirements, architectural plans, limitations, and municipal approval
that would ensure their safety and prosperity. “There are not even plans submitted to the City council at
all and there could be issues there in time to come with structural problems.
They just get their homes drawn up and build the homes themselves.” Pietermaritzburg attorney, Lucky Nhlabathi, moved to Mpumuza
from Ballito in 2015 and said the area was relaxed and had beautiful views. “Things are changing,” he told Weekend Witness. “When the
Group Areas Act was relaxed a lot of us black people moved to the suburbs
because we wanted to associate ourselves with the elite and supreme. But what
is wrong with bringing that same lifestyle to the rural areas? I can certainly
live that same lifestyle here,” he said. Nhlabathi said the house was worth over R3 million. Businessman, Sipho Zondi, also moved to Mpumuza in 2015
after he had been renting a flat in the CBD. Zondi said he liked the area because it was peaceful and away
from the busy city life. “You own everything here. You only have to worry about
paying for water and electricity and that on its own gives you peace of mind.
The land is also very spacious ...” Zondi has built a double-storey house in the area worth over
R1 million. Ingonyama Trust Board Established In 1994, the Ingonyama Trust holds in title
about 2,8 million hectares of land across KwaZulu-Natal. According to its website, this is for “the benefit, material
welfare and social well-being of the members of the tribes and communities
living on the land”. King Goodwill Zwelithini is the sole trustee of the board,
which indicates he is the largest property owner in the province.