Former president Jacob Zuma, who is under pressure to respond to claims made at the Zondo Commission implicating him in state capture, on Monday said he would announce his decision on the matter soon. “Given that there is a lot of public interest in the matter, the former president will be issuing a statement around the several issues that had been said about him at the commission during the course of the week,” Zuma’s spokesperson, Vukile Mathabela, said. Zuma’s lawyers, who have attended the hearings, are drafting his statement. The commission is reported to be on the verge of subpoenaing Zuma after he failed to give an undertaking that he would either appear before it or provide an affidavit on allegations made against him by several witnesses testifying at the commission. Zuma has been asked by the commission on at least three occasions since April last year to provide a written undertaking that he will appear before it between July 15 and 19. The commission also requested that he provide an affidavit by June 12. Zuma is on record as saying no evidence implicating him on state capture has been put before the commission. Addressing his supporters outside the Pietermaritzburg high court last month, shortly after appearing in connection with corruption charges stemming from the arms deal in the 90s, he described claims made against him at the commission as “hearsay”. “There is no evidence saying Zuma has done this or that … I know that Agrizzi [former Bosasa chief operation officer Angelo Agrizzi] said things about me, there was nothing of substance — he was just speculating,” Zuma said at the time. Former finance minister Nhlanhla Nene, Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula and Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan are among commission witnesses that have testified against Zuma. At the centre of the case are claims that he exerted pressure on ministers and senior public servants to make government decisions favouring members of the Gupta family and companies linked to them. Nene told the commission that Zuma removed him as finance minister after he had refused to bow to pressure from the Guptas to approve the “expensive” nuclear deal between SA and Russia. Nene was then replaced by Zuma loyalist Des van Rooyen. Last week the commission turned down Zuma’s request to be given questions which the commission wanted to put before him in advance.