The family of a young crèche teacher who was gunned down at dusk on Monday have ruled out that it was related either to taxi wars or the notorious Williams gang. The murdered woman, Nobuhle Marilyn Dlamini (24), and her boyfriend Swazi Maduna, were attacked by two armed men while sitting in Dlamini’s car which was parked in her aunt’s driveway late on Monday afternoon. Dlamini was related to alleged gangster boss Ian Williams, who was killed in a shootout with police in 2016, and her aunt owns a taxi business. Anna Qwabe-Williams, Dlamini’s aunt, told The Witness on Tuesday that Dlamini, who stayed in Jika Joe on Echo Road, had been visiting her at her home in nearby Ash Road when she was killed. “She arrived on Monday morning and said she would be spending the entire day with me. It was a nice relaxed day and everyone was at home. The little children were playing outside, and the older ones were sitting around the yard,” she said. Qwabe-Williams said at around 5 pm Dlamini had just finished preparing a meal for her before Dlamini went out to sit with her boyfriend in her car, which was parked in the driveway. Moments later she heard gunshots. “The little children came running inside the house screaming ‘Gogo, they’re shooting us’. I heard Nobuhle crying out for help saying they were killing her. “The men [the killers] were about to walk out of the gate when they heard her crying and then one of them went back to her and fired more shots at her. “When I came out of the house, also screaming for help, I helplessly watched [the assailant] firing shots at her before running off again.” She said a white BMW pulled up in front of the gate and the assailants got in and they drove off. She said she didn’t get a proper look at the men and doesn’t know who they were or why they attacked her niece and her boyfriend. Qwabe-Williams said the boyfriend, Maduna, was able to escape while the shots were being fired and ran behind the house for cover. She said he was shot five times and is currently recovering in hospital. She said Dlamini was shot nine times and by the time they arrived at hospital, she was already dead. “Most of the bullets hit her face, neck and chest. She also had gunshot wounds on her thigh. I think she was probably already dead even before we drove her to hospital, but we were all in such a panic and didn’t know what else to do,” she said. Qwabe-Williams, who is a long-distance taxi owner, said: “This has nothing to do with taxi wars because if it were I would have also been killed because I am the one who owns taxis in this house.” She said Dlamini was a cousin of her late nephew, Ian Williams, who was known as a notorious Pietermaritzburg gangster, but said the hit on Dlamini also had nothing to do with the Ian Williams saga as that was “dead and buried years ago”. “We just hope and pray that God will intervene, and justice will prevail,” said Qwabe-Williams. Dlamini, who had a six-year-old daughter and worked as a teacher at a local crèche, was described as a loving and humble person who loved cooking for her family. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said the police were investigating a case of murder and attempted murder. No arrests have been made as yet. The shooting incident occurred in Ash Road which is close to Brookside Mall. The centre was anxious on Tuesday to point out to clients that the shooting did not take place on its premises. 