Six months ago Bina Moodley watched in horror as a devastating storm blew the roof off her family home and wrecked the property, damaging most of her belongings. But through generous donations of money, building supplies and time from family, friends and the wider community, the Raisethorpe home she shares with her husband, Marney, and their dog, Pickles, is today rebuilt. Moodley (67), a pensioner who was a popular photographer, said she did not have to pay a single cent towards the renovation, saying that people donated about R80 000 to their cause. The house had its roof blown off during a heavy storm in December, and every room was seriously damaged. Moodley was in Scottsville taking photographs for Christmas when the devastation was happening. All their furniture and bedding was waterlogged, and their flooring was damaged. She said she and her husband had to stay with relatives for two months afterwards. “Almost immediately people started coming forward to find out how we are and to offer help. Reconstruction began soon because the word spread on WhatsApp and family members from overseas were even contacting us to see how they can help.” People had donated or paid towards roof sheeting, a new geyser, new tiled flooring, furniture, curtains and even a flat-screen TV, Moodley said. She added that neighbours had worked until late on the night of the incident mopping up the damage. “One man phoned me saying he had just built a house and had boxes of nails and that we may have them.” She said: “When this took place, we didn’t even have R30 in the bank … and I thought at the time we’ll use our grant money to sort out one thing at a time. But we never had to pay for anything, and I never thought everything will get done in one go.” The renovations took less than three months to be completed, and minor touch-ups, like skirting boards, are all that’s left to do. “It’s a real fairytale. In a time of disaster people can come together like this. And people were always phoning to make sure we were okay and had food and offering assistance.” Moodley said people who were admirers of her father, well-known athlete Thiery Rambath, had also come forward to offer assistance. “This was his house and it would have been a shame if a place where an icon lived was destroyed, so people who knew his legacy came forward to help us.”