Two teachers on Monday told the Pietermaritzburg high court that school guidance counsellor Darren Goddard mainly counselled “white boys”, even though the school is multi-racial. Each had a boy in her class whom Goddard allegedly sexually interfered with. Goddard is charged with the rapes and sexual assaults of young boys. The state alleges he had counselled most of them at the school where he had worked, which also has a pre-primary. These allegations are all vehemently denied by Goddard. When one of the teachers was asked on Monday how she knew that Goddard only counselled “white boys”, she said it was her “observation”. The teacher said that first she was concerned that Goddard only saw “boys” and brought this up at a staff meeting. She said she also asked Goddard why this was the case and he told her he had done his Master’s degree with “young males”. She could not remember the details of the Master’s. A few months afterwards she said she asked Goddard why he only saw “white boys” at the multi-racial school. He said there were cultural differences between white and black children and he had not studied that. She said there was a girl in her class who she felt needed counselling but Goddard referred her to a place out of school that she could go to. He did not counsel her. She said that once Goddard came to her to say that a boy he was counselling, who was in her class, had a problem with his private parts, pointing to the back and the front region. This boy has turned out to be one of the boys whom Goddard had allegedly sexually assaulted. The teacher said she told Goddard that she needed to phone the boy’s mother to check when he was last dewormed. Goddard told her not to because “we know how she [the boy’s mother] reacts”. The teacher said she spoke to the child. She agreed under cross-examination that when she asked the boy if anyone had touched him he said no. She also told him that if he did not wipe himself properly, it could sting. He then went to the toilet to wipe himself to get rid of the stinging sensation. There were no signs of distress in him, she conceded. The teacher recalled a day when the school got a new camera. Goddard took photographs of children playing in the jungle gym area. She said he then took out his cellphone and took a selfie with a child. She reported this to management because it was “not normal for us teachers to take selfies with children with our own phone”. She was told by Goddard’s advocate, Shane Matthews, under cross-examination that he was showing the child how to use “the rotating screen of the camera”. However, the teacher insisted it was his cell phone. The other teacher who testified spoke about a different boy. She said the Goddard was concerned about this boy’s concentration but she did not think it was a problem. The case continues.