A pregnant woman, who was one of three Maqonqo family members who were injured when they were ambushed by gunmen at their home earlier this month, gave birth to a healthy baby girl on Wednesday. Kwenzekile Maphumulo (29) and her two-year-old daughter, Melokuhle, were shot dead in the incident. Meanwhile, two men appeared in court this week in connection with the shooting. Philani Ndlovu and Ayanda Makhehla Dlamini appeared at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court on Monday and were remanded in custody until June 11 for a possible bail application. When The Witness approached police on Tuesday to inquire if any arrests had been made, the KZN police media centre said they had not done so as the matter was still under investigation. However, The Witness established yesterday that the two men were arrested last Friday. Themba Maphumulo, whose family were attacked, said on Thursday he was glad that the two suspects were arrested but said his family are still living in fear as some of their assailants have not been arrested yet. He earlier told The Witness that his family had come under attack following his attempts to intervene in an argument between neighbours on Sunday June 26. Maphumulo’s sister — Kwenzekile, and her two-year-old daughter, Melo­kuhle — were killed when three men barged in and shot everyone in the home. Three other family members — Maphumulo’s wife, grandfather (83) and his pregnant sister Velile — were also shot and were taken to hospital. Maphumulo said on Thursday that Velile, who was nine months pregnant when the attackers shot her on her upper left thigh, went into induced labour on Wednesday and gave birth to a baby girl and thankfully the baby is healthy. Doctors had told the family that they could not operate on Velile’s thigh until the baby was born. “My grandfather is scheduled to go to Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital in Durban on Friday next week to remove the bullet, which is still stuck in his body. “My wife, who was shot once on her lower back, was discharged but she is constantly sleeping because of the pain,” said Maphumulo. Provincial police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said investigations are continuing and more arrests can be expected soon.