Well, neither does anyone else it appears, according to
reports from the municipality. Last year, the city’s air was rated the worst in the
province, but technical faults in the city’s air-quality monitoring stations
have left gaps in the current data about hazardous gas, so it’s impossible to
say how bad things are. The stations collect information on potentially hazardous
gases, wind speed and direction, ambient temperature, pressure, humidity,
rainfall and solar radiation. Msunduzi says the levels are in compliance with the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), but admit that there have been times
when levels of toxic gas, including ozone, have exceeded the recommended
limits. Air quality reports sent to Weekend Witness by the
municipality show gaps in its data, with some gas levels having no data at all,
according to air quality specialist Andrew Simpson. He said: “In respect of the information provided by
Msunduzi, the March monitoring results were out of peak pollution season, which
occurs during winter (May to August). “Unfortunately, this leaves us with little to comment on results
provided at this stage, as they are not in the peak pollution season and there
are many gaps in the data owing to technical instrument faults, as reported.” Residents in Maritzburg have complained for years about
nasty smells and potentially toxic emissions from factories in the city and
fires at the municipal dump. Some even took to The Witness Facebook page this
week to comment on the city’s air quality, with one resident saying: “Most
residents near the dump are on asthma pumps.” Msunduzi Municipality has four monitoring stations, with
another owned by the KZN Department of Environmental Affairs. The stations are at Northdale Hospital, in the city hall
parking lot, at the Pietermaritzburg Airport and in Edendale on Herschensonn
Road. Simpson said that at the station at the city hall, only one
of three gas analysers produced results in March. These were for carbon
monoxide (CO). The sulphur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) analysers
were both out of action. At the airport station, only two out of the three machines
checking for particle matter (PM10) and ozone (O3) reported compliant
concentrations. “Results from the SO2 analyser are reported, but appear to
be faulty. The results do not make sense,” said Simpson. “PM10, SO2 and NO2 are typically considered the most
important criteria pollutants. Of these, only PM10 data is available for
Pietermaritzburg Airport and there is nothing valid from either station for SO2
or NO2.” The view of the city from Clarendon at midday on Thursday. In June last year, The Witness reported that
Pietermaritzburg had the most polluted air in the province, alongside South
Durban, Richards Bay, Estcourt and Newcastle. One of the key reasons for this is that the city is shaped
like a bowl and traps air, instead of letting wind distribute the pollution. Cool air is trapped by a layer of warm air, which acts like
a lid trapping pollutants in the cool air near low-lying areas. According to University of KwaZulu-Natal agrometeorology
Professor Mike Savage, the city has a high concentration of industry within
low-lying residential areas, where wind speeds are generally lower than
high-lying areas, and pollution is therefore not dispersed. He added that the extent of air pollution experienced by
residents depends mainly on wind speed and direction, and temperatures. Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said
that air quality is a priority for the city, adding: “All AQMS (air quality
monitoring stations) are functional. Data is collected, validated and used to
compile monthly air quality reports per station.” Mafumbatha said the municipality completed a baseline air
quality assessment during 2018 and is also developing an Air Quality Management
Plan (AQMP). A draft report will be released for public comment within the next
week. “The air quality network will continue to expand depending on the budget
available,” she said. Gases that pose a
risk to health According to Environment Protection Authority Victoria, the
following gases have the following health effects. The main sources of sulfur dioxide are
coal-fired power stations, the smelting of aluminium and other metals, and
exhaust fumes from diesel vehicles. The main source for the gas in urban areas
is the combustion of fossil fuels, including petrol, diesel and coal. Very high amounts of carbon monoxide in the
body can result in oxygen deprivation, leading to loss of consciousness or
death. This colourless and odourless gas is found
in smoke, exhaust fumes from cars, petrol and gas engines, gas ovens,
generators and gas and wood heaters. Children, people over 65, pregnant women
and people with existing heart or lung conditions are more sensitive to its
effects. Symptoms include wheezing, chest tightness and difficulty breathing. The particles come from burning coal,
organic matter (wood and grass), rubber, plastic, cars, power plant emissions
and bushfires. Ozone also increases the risk of respiratory
infections and places the elderly and those with existing lung disease at risk
of health problems. Most polluted city in
KZN last year In June last year, The Witness reported that Pietermaritzburg
had the most polluted air in the province, alongside South Durban, Richards
Bay, Estcourt and Newcastle. This was according to a provincial environmental outlook
report that was released by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Economic
Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs in June 2018. The 275-page report focused on climate change, air quality
management, biodiversity and other issues. The report stated that the transport sector is a significant
and growing polluter, while industrial and commercial emitters, biomass burning
and domestic fuels burning are ongoing concerns. Air quality that was measured at three monitoring stations
in the city also revealed that sulfur dioxide levels exceeded safety limits,
while high dust fallout in Mkondeni was cited as another concern. Unpredictable climate conditions continue to be a problem in
the province, with the report predicting generally drier conditions and
droughts more likely to become more frequent and more intense. Water scarcity, land scarcity, and the quality of human life
and ecological systems are identified as the potential environmental “tipping
points with the likelihood of further deterioration” over time. Municipal air quality
unit suffers significant staff shortage Msunduzi’s air quality unit is operating with a large number
of staff vacancies. Only 11 out of 33 posts are currently filled. The municipality has one trained and appointed air quality
officer and a deputy air quality officer, while another five environmental
health practitioners have been trained on air quality management. Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said compliance
inspections at industries in the city over the past two years were done and
that 120 factories were issued with non-compliance notices. She added that the municipality receives, on average, 10 air
quality complaints per month. “All complaints are investigated. Compliance notices are
issued when necessary and further legal action and engagements will be taken
when necessary,” Mafumbatha said. The environmental health unit issues around 250 summons per
year, which includes those for air quality management and contraventions. “Fines range from between R1 000 to R10 000 per summons. A
small percentage of these are related to air quality,” Mafumbatha said. She added that the unit opted not to rely on and enforce
local by-laws on industry as the fines are too low. Enforcement penalties, in terms of the air quality act,
carry a maximum fine of R5 million and/or imprisonment of five years, or both
for a first offence. Pietermaritzburg residents took to The Witness Facebook page
recently to comment on the city’s air quality. Trish Collocott said: “We have suffered for years with
certain industries and the mismanagement of the dump polluting our air. We have
the right to breathe clean, unpolluted air and it is the responsibility of
local and regional government to monitor and remove culprits.” Palesa Lucylu Tshezi posted: “Sobantu residents suffer the
most. We have become a joke in the city because people from other townships
always say Sobantu stinks. I am just worried about the effects this smell will
have on our health. Something must be done.” Michele van der Merwe added: “It’s disgusting and most
residents near the dump are on asthma pumps.” Businessperson Ali Engelbrecht, who lives in Howick but
works in Pietermaritzburg, said: “Coming into Pieter­maritzburg in the mornings
is like hitting a wall of pollution and toxicity. During the day my eyes start
to burn.” The City dump There has been a fire at the New England Road municipal dump
almost every year since at least 2010. In that year, The Witness reported a
“massive fire” at the municipal landfill site, which was condemned by
environmentalists who said it released toxic emissions into the atmosphere. Musa Chamane, of environmental group GroundWork, said in the
article that the fire had released toxic emissions which could lead to
complications like asthma and respiratory diseases. In 2017, another fire at the dump saw several
Pietermaritzburg schools close their doors until the smog and stench had
disappeared. The New England Road dumping site has long been a source of
concern for environmental groups who claim the municipality is failing to
maintain it properly.