Amid the alarming escalation of attacks on trucks on the N3, another driver escaped with minor injuries yesterday after he came under heavy fire while driving on the highway before Market Road. The incident happened days after ministers held a media briefing to announce they were dealing with attacks on trucks. The GSF truck driver was driving on the N3 northbound at about 5 am when unknown gunmen in a silver VW Golf started shooting at his truck. This is the KZN second attack this week. On Tuesday a driver and his assistant were shot multiple times on the N2 northbound just after the M1 Higginson highway. There were a dozen attacks on trucks at the weekend. Dhiren Krishna, GSF Trucking managing director, said while the driver tried to get away from the assailants, an object pierced the windshield and hit him. He lost control of the truck and crashed into the barrier wall. The assailants drove off after noticing a passing patrol vehicle. The driver was treated for minor injuries at the scene. Krishna said his truck was heading to Johannesburg with cargo. “[The driver] said there was a car driving next to him and the occupants pointed a firearm at him and signalled him to pull over. He tried to accelerate [away] then they started shooting at him.” Krishna said the driver was still “shaken” after the traumatic ordeal. The driver believed he was a victim of the ongoing truck attacks. “These guys are very brazen, and they have no fear. That is not a hijacking hotspot. If it was an attempted hijacking, we believe that the modus operandi would have been different.” Krishna said he believed the attacks on trucks were motivated by criminality. “They [assailants] didn’t know whether the driver was South African or a foreign national. The people behind these attacks are just trying to create an upset. “People need to be arrested and held accountable. We don’t know what elements are at play here and why our drivers are under attack.” This week, Road Freight Association spokesperson Gavin Kelly said at least 213 people had been killed in the attacks since March 2018. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said police had not received any reports of the incident. “It’s fake news. Police are not aware of this incident,” said Gwala.