You may end up with new friends, rowdy memories and the
realisation that you can survive on three hours’ sleep while eating only rice
and beans — but do you really get your money’s worth getting a tertiary
qualification? A job drought because of an ailing economy, topped off by
the possibility of having a mountain of student debt after studying, could be
making South African youngsters think twice about taking on the traditional
tertiary route, especially as many as 57% of urban South African parents are
not saving for their children’s education, research by Old Mutual showed. The job market itself is shifting, as is the way people
learn skills, and dynamic and ever-changing workplaces mean employees themselves
have to constantly upskill to stay useful to their companies. And a prospective employee’s persona plays a role in their
worth now more than ever, with social media presence and ventures online (for
better or worse) being taken into account by employers. Enter advancements in technology paving the way for anyone
to be able to learn pretty much anything online and creating new avenues for
people to take reputable courses — both free or costing a fraction of a
traditional qualification — via correspondence. The Internet also offers the ability to present a portfolio
of work on a personal website, which is becoming increasingly necessary as the
freelance — or “gig” — economy takes off. The necessity of tertiary education is a hot topic
worldwide, and whether that piece of paper you’re awarded after three or four
years of toil is really worth as much today as it once was. Graduates being
crushed under the weight of exorbitant student loans is one of the main drivers
of this feeling. A recent survey by PPS, a financial services company, found
that new South African graduates were concerned about finding employment.  The survey, part of their student confidence index, found
that nearly 40% of graduates were concerned they would not be hired immediately
after completing their studies. The most positive graduates were those in accounting and the
legal fields. Interestingly, the survey found that just 27% of students
wanted to pursue postgraduate qualifications, while 40% were keen on going into
the job market after studying. Some 84% cited cost as the main prohibitor. “This differs from previous years and could be the result of
the tougher economy where the general sentiment among students is to enter the
workforce — and earn a living — sooner,” explained PPS’s Motshabi Nomvethe. The survey also found that 42% of graduates felt skilled
professionals found it difficult to find appropriate jobs, with some convinced
that moving overseas was the solution. Traditional higher
education is still in high demand A tertiary degree allows people to learn how to be a
flexible learner and adapt to new circumstances, says Professor Ahmed Bawa, the
CEO of Universities South Africa. Bawa said the demand for traditional universities is not going
down, and the government planned to get tertiary institution participation up
by 2030 as part of the National Development Plan. “There are always questions being asked about university and
whether it is worthwhile, but South Africa has a unique situation where
unemployment of graduates is about six percent — way below the average of the
25 to 30-year-old age group.” He said, however, that interest in private vocational
colleges and online learning would likely increase over time, saying: “The
public sector can’t meet all the demand by itself.”  Bawa said the traditional model of higher education was
still crucial because it developed the person in addition to offering
education. “The big advantage is it prepares you to be a flexible learner and
adapt to new circumstances. “It is important to be able to pick up new skills, and that
ability is becoming more critical as we head up to the fourth industrial
revolution.” But recruiters are
seeing the situation differently Bridget Jones, managing director of local recruitment firm
Pronel, says employers were still picky when it came to selecting qualified
people. She told Weekend Witness that some companies would even tell
their staff which tertiary institutions they’d prefer their candidates to come
from. “Many corporates still say a tertiary qualification is
necessary because they get a high number of applicants so the criteria needs to
be stricter. “Families think getting a degree will give their child a
massive leg-up, but tragically they may just end up getting stuck with student
loans and few job prospects. If companies don’t believe in the quality of your
institution, they won’t want you. But this isn’t a blanket rule.” Jones said, however, that industries like IT and creative
sectors were generally more open-minded with applicants, since it was possible
for people in these fields to prove competency or have portfolios of evidence. “It’s easier to test competency in an industry like IT
because there are yes or no answers. “So if a candidate can’t get past problem x, then they won’t
move on.” She said another problem was that students went into fields
which were too saturated, like humanities and social sciences. She said local companies could “afford to be fussy” with
applicants for now because the job market was not totally ready to recognise
prior learning, like with learning something online. “But the creative and IT
fields are less fussy,” Jones said. We need to question
the old way of thinking about how skills are gained Analysts agreed that the shift in technology, which allowed
for independent learning online, as well as heavy student debt, was also being
seen locally. They, however, felt that South Africa’s job market may not be
ready to accommodate this shift because it was still stuck in the traditional
way of thinking what should be expected of employees.  Tech guru Arthur Goldstuck said South Africans were taking
to using online resources in lieu of traditional qualifications, but said a
degree was still seen as the “holy grail”. “Online qualifications are still not taken seriously in this
country. For example, there is a skills shortage in IT, but employers still
want very specific qualifications.” He said that if a person could produce a portfolio of proof
that they can do the work, the situation may be different. “We are seeing two flaws in the system: the first is not
enough spaces in universities, and the second is it’s hard to get work
experience and yet so many jobs require that. “But the problem is that some online qualifications are seen
as ‘fake’.” Goldstuck said in the gig economy — where freelancers pair
up with companies — the situation was a bit different, since it was more about
what someone can do rather than what they’re qualified in. Dawie Roodt, an economist at the Efficient Group, agreed
that employers still believed qualification was king, but predicted a
“disruption” of that thinking in the coming years. He said research showed that
qualified people earned about double those with just matric, which suggested
employers were still interested in qualified people. “When I grew up, we were bombarded with the message that you
must get a qualification. But a qualification does not always mean acquiring
skills to be able to be useful in your field. “There are these technological changes taking place and I
believe that’s the way the world will change. The business model of local
higher education is 1 000 years old and it will get disrupted by people going
for shorter courses.” Roodt added that workplaces were ever-changing, meaning an
employee had to continue learning new skills while on the job. He said student debt was a factor in graduates’ lives, but
said its more about a slow economy and the lack of jobs rather than a complete
inability to pay off loans. Roodt added: “Some good universities charge exorbitant fees,
but does it really mean there’s better education? Actually, what’s more
important is that contacts are made at these universities. “Rich people send their kids there and it’s not what you
learn, but who you learn to know.” So you want to study
online 1. Do your homework: If you find a field of study that you
like, search widely on who may be offering qualifications. Take your time with
this process. Only trust courses offered by recognised universities. If
you find something suitable which is on other sources, try to research how
seriously their qualification is taken. Try to get an idea of how that
particular field values online qualifications. 2. Try before you buy: Try to find ways to get a taster of
the course. Let’s say you want to learn computer programming: learn a bit about
it using resources like YouTube and GitHub, and try it out for a while to see
if you have an affinity for it. 3. Check out the testimonials: Are there hundreds of
thousands of people endorsing the course? Does it have an overall rating of
four-and-a-half stars? This is a good starting point, but thorough research into
the course being offered is still necessary. 4. Understand that this route is tough: Apart from having to
be disciplined, you’ll have to brace yourself for frustration. You’ll likely
hit a few brick walls with your course content, and the inability to ask
questions as you would face-to-face is another hindrance. 5. Have a concrete idea of where you see yourself in the
future: Don’t take courses on a whim. Have a vision of where you want it to
take you, then you’ll be better positioned both to select a course and to make
your move once the course is done. Saving for education
has to be a long-term effort Priya Naicker of Old Mutual, advises that parents have a
long-term savings plan for their children’s higher education. She says that as many as 57% of urban South African parents
are not saving for their children’s education. The cost of higher education per year is between R60 000 and
R70 000, and could rise to R165 600 by 2030 and R255 000 by 2035 because of
inflation. Living expenses, accommodation and study material can add another
R20 000 on top of that. Naicker advises parents to start saving as early as
possible, that way the interest that is gained on the savings can possibly beat
inflation. 1. Naicker says savings can start from as little as R250 per
month. “This means that by simply cutting out eight coffees per month, you can
start saving for your child’s education.” 2. She advises putting the savings in a tax-free savings
account, where all the money made on the growth of the investment will not be
subject to tax so long as it is within a certain limit. “Because you can open a
tax-free savings account for each of your children, a family of four can save
up to R132 000 annually in this way.” 3. Another option is using a unit trust. “Although exposure
to market fluctuations means there’s some risk involved, the advantage is that
you can access your money at any stage, increase and decrease your
contributions, and add lump sums without incurring penalties.” 4. Naicker also advises trying to find additional sources of
income, like letting out spare rooms or using your skills to gain extra income
on the side. 5. Studying part-time while working, is another way to make
tertiary education more affordable, Naicker says, adding that online courses
are “an increasingly attractive option”. 6. Choose a plan, and stick to it, says Naicker. “Rather
than being panicked into inaction, empower yourself with information and ensure
your financial plan mirrors your financial priorities.” 