A man who made headlines 27 years ago when he was born as a healthy child to a paraplegic mother in the city, was tragically killed at the weekend. Justin Patrice Marcell, a teacher, died in a motorbike accident early on Saturday morning in Woodhouse Road. The family said they do not know how the accident occurred but it appeared that no other vehicle was involved. His heartbroken mother, Patricia Naidoo, who was born with spina bifida and is paralysed from the waist down, described him on Monday as her “miracle baby”. Justin was her only child. “I thought I would never be a mum. God blessed us with this child. He was more than special to me,” she said. When Justin was born The Witness ran a front-page story about his birth. At the time, Naidoo had encouraging words for other disabled people.  A recent family photo of Justin, his dad Marshall Naidoo, Justin’s son Elijah and his mother Patricia. She said: “People must not feel ashamed, there is nothing to feel ashamed about. We are people who live normal lives. Our community must learn to lose any stigma they have about dis­abled people.” The Witness even did a follow-up story when Justin was six years old and went to school for the first time. Naidoo recalled fond memories of her son, saying that when he was 13 years old, she asked God what she should give him and she decided to give him a guitar. Justin wore many hats. He was also a musician extraordinaire, a wonderful cook, mechanic and a biker, said Naidoo. “He was unusual. He touched everyone’s heart. He brought me untold joy. There wasn’t a day that he hurt me,” she said. Naidoo said that she always thought Justin would say goodbye to her, not the other way around. She said that although her son has gone too soon, she believes he fulfilled his purpose in life. Naidoo said her son had shared a very strong bond with her and her husband, Marshall. “We welcomed Justin as a miracle. We bid farewell to him as a legend,” she said. She said that Justin had always taken care of her and whenever she needed him, he dropped everything to be by her side. His funeral will take place on Saturday.