In just one week, 29 critically-endangered vultures have been poisoned in two separate incidents in KZN leaving 27 dead and two juvenile White-backed vultures still fighting for their lives. The first poisoning took place on Friday. Conservationists at a private game reserve in Zululand came across 11 dead vultures — seven African White-backed, three Lappet-faced and one White-headed vulture. The reserve alerted the Zululand Vulture Project and Zap-Wing, the aerial wing of Project Rhino, to help ground crews searching the area. Chris Kelly from Wildlife ACT and the Zululand Vulture Project said both the African White-backed and White-headed vultures are listed as critically endangered, with populations declining dramatically in the past decade in KwaZulu-Natal. Kelly said during an aerial survey in 2018, Ezemvelo KwaZulu-Natal Wildlife recorded no White-headed breeding pairs. “This is indicative of the decline of this species in Zululand and is of major concern for vulture conservationists,” he said. The second poisoning occurred on Wednesday this week where 18 White-backed vultures were poisoned, also in Zululand. This happened in the same area but not on the same property. Kelly said an antelope carcass was poisoned in both cases, killing the vultures that ate the flesh. Two juvenile White-backed vultures that have so far survived the poisoning but are “extremely weak” are currently in the care of Raptor Rescue in Camperdown. Director and raptor expert Ben Hoffman said it is believed the vultures were killed for muthi purposes. He said there is a major muthi market in Zululand that supplies Warwick Triangle muthi market in Durban and another market in Johannesburg. He said the dead vultures would be frozen and from there samples would be taken for lead testing to determine the type of poison used. He said the carcasses would be sent to the University of KwaZulu-Natal for genetic recording. He added that the bone marrow would also be tested as lead levels were higher in the bone than the blood. He said out of the 18 poisoned vultures, seven were certain to have had nests. It is currently breeding season for vultures. He said the two surviving birds are “clinging to life” and said it can take up to six months to rehabilitate a poisoned vulture. A statement issued on behalf of Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, Wildlife ACT and the Zululand Vulture Project said one of the recovered Lappet-faced carcasses was a tagged individual nearing breeding age. “This particular vulture has been re-sighted on numerous occasions throughout South Africa and has recently returned to its KwaZulu-Natal range, probably with the intention of breeding within the next few years. Its loss is a major blow to the province’s breeding Lappet-faced vulture population.” The poisoning is being investigated by the Zululand SAPS Stock Theft Unit. A criminal case has been opened.