A Liberty Midlands Mall cleaner’s singing voice has been complimented as “angelic” by patrons who have been fortunate enough to hear her singing while going about doing her job. Local woman Yvonne Spain posted a video on Facebook of the cleaner, Phindile Gabela, after she was impressed by her singing. Spain said she was inside a toilet stall when she heard someone singing in a voice that she said was the most soothing voice she has ever heard. “When I heard her, I thought, what’s happening? Where is this angelic voice coming from? “I had to finish my business quickly because I didn’t want whoever was singing to leave before I could meet her. “I walked out and thought I’d find a shopper but there she was, in her uniform and holding the mop. “I was truly moved and I don’t think we’d find something like this anywhere else in the world,” said Spain. Gabela (32), who has worked at the mall since 2017, said she received compliments about her singing almost every day. “I love singing. I sing when I clean, cook or do the washing,” she said. “A lot of customers have told me that I have an amazing voice. “Some say I have made their day or lifted their spirits and that just makes me happy. Just the other day a woman approached me after she heard me singing and gave me R50.”  Gabela, who is originally from Swayimane but currently stays in Machibiza, told Weekend Witness that she started singing when she was in Grade 5 at Mthethomusha Primary School. “Growing up I knew I was gifted and have used every platform available to share my gift with people around me. “I sang in school choirs and church choirs and some of the choirs I’m part of have won competitions.” The mother of three girls — twins aged five and a seven-year-old — said her daughters have also taken a liking to singing. “My daughters and I now sing together because I am forever singing,” she said. “My family knows that when I am singing, I don’t want anyone to disturb me, so they just let me be or join me. “Singing just lifts up my spirit and I feel even better when it does the same for those around me.” On hearing about the Facebook video that has gained her popularity at the mall, Gabela said she was hopeful that the clip might attract people who could help her achieve her childhood dream of becoming a professional singer; but until then, she said she would happily carry on sharing her angelic voice with the mall customers while she goes about mopping floors. Visit The Witness Facebook page to watch a video of Gabela hitting the soothing notes.