Disciplinary processes against some Townhill police officers have started after they failed to open an accident case believed to involve a relative of a well-known city security boss. The crash happened on July 3 this year on Townbush Road at around 6.20 pm, causing serious injury to an Eastwood man who had to be rushed to hospital following the accident. The man, who asked not to be named out of fear of being victimised, was driving home from work when a car slammed into his, pushing his vehicle off the road. “As I turned into Townbush Road, from Neden Road, this car went straight into the back of my vehicle,” he said. “My car started spinning and then went down a bank.” The man said he was rushed to hospital with internal bleeding and a haematoma and had to be operated on the next day. CCTV footage of the accident seen by The Witness shows a white SUV, believed to belong to the security boss’s company, sliding to a halt at the roadside. The driver’s hazard lights are on. A man can be seen pulling up onto the opposite side of the road and then walks to the driver’s side of the white SUV. A man climbs out of the damaged car and then gets into the vehicle with the man who parked at the roadside. The vehicle can then be seen speeding off while the driver’s wrecked car and the rest of the accident scene is left behind. “I went to try and open a police case after the accident but some of the officers at Townhill police station refused to open one for me,” the Eastwood man told The Witness. After several days trying to report the accident, he went to the Pietermaritzburg Police Cluster offices where he reported the station and the case. The case was opened 15 days after the accident. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a case of reckless and negligent driving had been opened against the driver of the SUV. “No arrests have been made. “We have also started the disciplinary process against the members who were working, for omission of duty,” said Ngobese. He said the driver could not be named until he appeared in court.