Good riddance! That was the reaction of some ANC councillors to news of the axing of their colleagues from the City’s executive committee (Exco) yesterday. They said the Exco was ineffective and failed to provide necessary leadership on issues of service delivery. “It was a factional Exco, not an ANC Exco. People who are Zuma supporters were given portfolio committees to chair because that’s where decisions were made about service delivery projects and their expenditure,” said one of the councillors. Philisiwe Sithole chaired the corporate services committee, Siphamandla Khumalo was for community services, sustainable development was under Eunice Majola-Zondi and the Deputy Mayor Thobani Zuma chaired infrastructure services. Mayor Themba Njilo was responsible for both the Exco and financial services portfolio committee. “The municipality wouldn’t be in the position it’s in if the Exco provided leadership instead of fighting petty factional fights. It was just so demoralising sitting in the committee meetings and watching some of them behave like children,” said another councillor. He said even during council meetings the Exco members failed to make contributions of substance. “[For] Some of them, all they knew [how] to say is: agreed, approved and seconded. I doubt they even bothered to read the agendas before the meetings they were supposed to chair.” Some of the ANC councillors said they felt sorry for Njilo because they felt he was never a politician to begin with. They said the businessman was brought in as a “neutral candidate” as the ANC factions were fighting over the control of the City ahead of the 2016 local government elections. “He was popular amongst the locals so the ANC took advantage of that and made him the mayoral candidate. “If I was in his position I would have refused the offer because he had no experience and this municipality needed a bulldog — someone who wasn’t going to take any nonsense ... and that’s not Njilo. “I guess he thought he could get the ANC caucus behind him but in the end some of them ended up undermining all his efforts.”