The horses that roam
the streets of Sweetwaters daily have not only become part of the township’s
identity, they are a local legend. According to
residents, the horses, over 50 of them, were dropped off in the township by a
“furious” white man after he had been given a raw deal at an auction in
Pietermaritzburg where he had tried to sell them. While some locals
dispute this version, most have  accepted
the tale as the only logical explanation for how so many horses ended up
sharing space with the local population. “I was born here in
Sweetwaters. There had never been any horses on our streets. The animals
suddenly appeared from nowhere,” Themba Ndlovu (79) said. According to Ndlovu,
the horses arrived in 2010. “Some people say they
actually saw the white man fling open the back door of a truck before the
horses bolted out. Those who witnessed the incident claim that it happened at
the T-junction of Dennis Shepstone Drive that goes to Hilton and Sweetwaters
road. “Most of us did not
see it happen but started to ask questions after spotting some horses in the
area,” Ndlovu. However, another
local Philani Makhanya, was quick to dismiss Ndlovu’s version. “Yes, there is that
kind of a story, but it’s a lie. The horses belong to the Mthalane family, who
live here in Sweetwaters. They brought a few horses from Bulwer and when the animals
reproduced and multiplied they did not have enough space to keep them and as a
result they ended up roaming the streets.  Sweetwaters  horse owner Linda Likaje rubbishes claims that it was a white man who dropped off the horses in the area. However, the
Mthalanes denied owning the dozens of horses now roaming Sweetwaters. “Yes, it is true that
my son bought two horses in Bulwer. The female then gave birth to two foals and
he ended up having four horses. Two of the horses have since died and the
remaining two are still here. So, it can’t be true that all these horses you
see here in Sweetwaters are his,” Ntombi Mthalane said. Mthalane, who lives
next to the spot where the man allegedly dropped off  the horses, said no locals saw this happen. “What I have been
told is that the horses were brought by local residents from kwaMpande (near
Henley Dam). “Honestly speaking, I
don’t believe the story about the white man,” she said. One of the local
horse owners, Linda Likaje, who owns a stable of 14 horses, backs Mthalane’s
version. “Yes, I’m aware of
the lies about the white man dropping horses in the area. The fact is that all
the horses you see around here have owners and those owners live here in
Sweetwaters. “The lies about how
the horses arrived here are actually quite dangerous as they have resulted in
some people stealing our horses using the excuse that they belonged to a white
man. “All these horses you
see on the streets have owners who take good care of them,” he said. Likaje, who is the
former chairperson of the Mgungundlovu Rural Horse Riding Association, said the
story about the origin of the horses has been investigated by animal
authorities and found to be a lie. “There have been
attempts to confiscate our horses but they all failed as we have proof showing
the animals belong to us. “What people refuse
to accept is that horse breeding has become part of our culture here in
Sweetwaters. Some of the horses participate in horse-racing events in the
province,” he said.  Ntombi Mthalane denies  that the horses  belong to her family. One of Likaje’s
horses (Khalazome) participated in one of the biggest horse-racing events in
KZN — the Dundee July — which
took place last month. SA Boerperd and
American Saddler breeds are among some of the horses that form part of Likaje’s
stable. Likaje, who was inspired by local horse-racing events to buy his first
horse in Utrecht 15 years
ago, said the horses are helping to uplift the Sweetwaters community. “The horses also
assist in instilling discipline in local youngsters as many of them are now
accomplished jockeys,” he said.