So what’s on TV tonight and how do I wrestle the remote away
from the guy in the house? Talk about middle-class problems. He likes sport and documentaries, and anything to do with
engines and that sort of thing. I like news channels, health and medical stuff.
We both like arty movies, some series (not the same type always), quality
comedy (the British stuff mainly) and oddly enough, cooking shows. So you’d
think there’d be enough to watch. But often there’s sweet blow all and I have
to confess I get the sulks. It’s a guilty confession that I enjoy a spot of mindless TV
to unwind from the business of the day, especially snuggled up with a rug after
supper and a shower in winter (what winter, hey?). I don’t know why so many people are so anti-TV. I think
there’s something so modernly Zen about chillaxing on the sofa with a cup of
tea as you watch something engaging or comforting. Life doesn’t always have to
be cerebral. But lately, decent programmes are so few and far between
that one finds oneself watching drivel sometimes just to fill the gaps. Repeats
of series, movies and other programmes ad nauseum are the order of the day. And
an innocent channel surf makes one lose faith in humanity. You never know what
you’ll get. The other night I was hopping around and found a big butt on
the screen. What the …?! Naked and Afraid in all its glory is about
survivalists who spend three weeks in the wilderness with a complete stranger.
Oh, and they do this in the altogether. Yep. The full monty. Completely
logical … Why do people want to watch it? They must enjoy it, because it’s
always on. Every night. A quick look online shows that Naked And Afraid shares
the Discovery Channel record for the highest-rated survival telecast at the
network since June 2009. Oh, so some people rather like it. And there are 10
series of it and 118 episodes. So, I guess we still have a lot more butts to see. Pass the
remote please. Then it appears that those who buy shows for DStv also have
an obsession about wild, lonely, cold people. There are a host of programmes
dealing with people who live in remote areas of ice. Arctic, Antarctic,
Iceland, oh, how they love the doccies with heaps of snow, icy wasteland and
plains of tundra in them. But they’re all so samey and formulaic that if you’ve
seen one, you’ve seen them all. And what about the animal documentaries? Now, some I love.
Give me a Richard Attenborough any day and I’ll be rapt. But, so many of these
wildlife doccies are so full of seemingly gratuitous animal deprivation and
violence that I shudder and am often forced to cover my eyes if he’s engrossed
in the drama of it all. “Here are animals fighting,” the narrators say in their
droning voices. “And here are some animals starving before the rains come. See
how weak and miserable they are, so hungry and sad. Many will die lingering
deaths. “And just here, you can see some animals that were wounded
by others who tried to eat them before they got away. Watch them too as they
die slowly and painfully. Did you see that wound? We’ll show you a proper close
up in case you didn’t. We’ll document every ounce of horror for you. Enjoy your
evening.” Channel change! Then there are the mindless reality shows that are pure
hell. Cue The Kardashians, the endless series about grown people behaving worse
than children, people competing for the attention of one person. Who watches
The Bachelor or that one where everyone has to cook dinner for one man and then
he decides who to take out on a date? (Do I sound old, I think as I type this.
Most probably.) Then there are the series that could be fairly engaging if
only they wouldn’t repeat everything at each advert break. They introduce the
show at the beginning, showing you all the best parts. Then at the first advert
break they say: “When we return …” and show the spoilers for the next part.
(Each show is interrupted every few minutes for these annoying long ad breaks.)
When the show comes back after the advert they recap the previous five minutes,
like their entire audience has some terrible brain affliction which means we
have obviously forgotten everything that just happened. Then they preview the
next five minutes. And so it goes on ad nauseum. If we added them up, we would
have wasted months of our lives watching these repeats of what we’ve just seen. And the honchos at the TV corporations wonder why people are
switching to Netflix and Showmax and other ad-free streaming services. Considering the amount of junk on TV, it makes me wonder,
have we sunk so low as society that this is entertainment? Can’t we do better? Probably. Hopefully. But thank goodness, when all else
fails, there are still the paid online channels. And failing anything on those,
we can switch the damn TV off and head to bed with a sigh, a mutter and a moan. Until we start the whole ritual again tomorrow night. (Note to the guy: Dearest, we need new batteries in the
remote. I fear I’ve worn ours out. Again.) 