As ANC leaders in KwaZulu-Natal switch from the politics of
cult personalities to a game of political survival, embattled eThekwini Mayor
Zandile Gumede (pictured), who did not see the change coming, now finds herself
in the political wilderness. A devoted supporter of former president Jacob Zuma, Gumede
was swept into power by the Zuma wave that gripped the country from 2007 until
early this year. Gumede, who cut her political teeth in community-based
organisations in Inanda, north of Durban, came into power after defeating SA
Communist Party (SACP) provincial chairperson James Nxumalo in the chaotic 2015
elections for the ANC eThekwini regional chairperson. Despite complaints by Nxumalo’s supporters that processes
leading to Gumede’s election were flawed, both ANC provincial and national
leadership structures — which at the time were dominated by Zuma’s supporters —
turned a deaf ear, paving the way for Gumede to be elected as mayor of one of
the country’s biggest metros. A ward councillor from 2007 until her election as mayor in
2016, Gumede’s political career has always been dogged by allegations of
corruption. Many were not surprised when shortly after being elected as
ANC eThekwini regional chairperson, she held a meeting with the controversial
Durban business forum Delangokubona — known for using violence to get
government contracts. Despite protests from opposition parties in the eThekwini
Municipality, ANC leaders in the province — including ANC KwaZulu-Natal
chairperson Sihle Zikalala, who is now the premier — at the time rallied behind
Gumede. Zikalala and other ANC leaders in the province who supported
Zuma had been under pressure to protect Gumede as she was part of the powerful
ANC bloc in KZN backing former AU chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s
candidature in the build-up to the 2017 ANC presidential elections, won by
President Cyril Ramaphosa. However, contrary to what many believe, Gumede’s political
woes did not begin in May when corruption-busting unit the Hawks decided to
charge her with fraud and corruption relating to the awarding of the
R200 million Durban solid waste (DSW) removal tender. The embattled mayor’s problems actually began early last
year when she and other hardcore Zuma supporters, including ANC KZN legislature
chief whip Super Zuma, rejected a peace deal meant to unite the former
president and Ramaphosa factions in the province. Gumede and Super Zuma, who at the time was the ANC’s
provincial secretary, and other Jacob Zuma loyalists, suffered a major blow
during last year’s ruling party provincial conference that saw Zikalala and
other candidates embracing the peace deal elected to key positions. From there on, Gumede was no longer in the good books of
Zikalala and others who had been in Jacob Zuma’s camp. While Gumede and her supporters in eThewkini continued to
project themselves as Zuma-ites, Zikalala and his backers — who increasingly
appear to have since smoked the peace pipe with Ramaphosa’s backers in the
province — made it clear that there was no longer a Zuma camp in the province. By the time Gumede was arrested for fraud in a R200 million
eThekwini Municipality tender, her political star was already on the wane. Once considered a strong ally of Zikalala, Gumede is now not
only out favour with the premier, who over the months has been entrenching his
influence within the ANC in KZN, but she has been struggling to find enough
support within the party’s powerful provincial executive committee (PEC), which
will eventually decide on her future. It is for this reason that her supporters have insisted that
question of her suspension over the criminal charges should be handled by the
ANC’s national executive committee (NEC). There, her supporters hope, she would be backed by the
former president’s supporters such as secretary-general Ace Magashule, former
North West premier Supra Mahumapelo and former Free State Agriculture MEC
Mosebenzi Zwane — all of whom have been implicated in state capture. Gumede, who is the only prominent Zuma supporter in KZN
still standing, in June suffered another blow when the PEC dissolved the
party’s eThekwini regional executive committee, stripping her of her power as
eThekwini regional chair. Unless there was a sudden change in the balance of power
within the ANC, Gumede, who clearly misread the political moment, will like
many other ANC leaders before her, not be able to avoid the inevitable — exile
to the political wilderness.