The ANC task team that has been investigating whether
embattled eThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede should return to work following her
suspension over a multi-million rand tender, has recommended that she should be
removed from her position. However, the ANC’s highest decision-making structure between
provincial conferences — the Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) — that
discussed the task team’s recommendations during the structure’s two-day
meeting that ended in Durban on Monday, resolved not to immediately implement
the task team’s recommendation. According to reliable sources, the ANC Provincial Working
Committee (PWC) that presented its report to the PEC was of the view that
keeping Gumede in her position would cause irreparable damage to the image of
the ruling party. “The PWC was of the view that efforts by the ANC to fight
corruption would ring hollow should comrade Gumede be allowed to return to
work. “While the PWC acknowledged the fact that Gumede has not
been found guilty by any court of law, it felt that the charges she was facing
were extremely serious and that returning her to the same office where she is
being accused of committing acts of corruption would send the wrong message to
the public,” the source said. Gumede, who since June has been on special leave following
her arrest by members of the corruption-busting unit  the Hawks, is currently out on R50 000 bail. Gumede, who will be back in court on Thursday, has been
charged with fraud and corruption in connection with the municipality’s R200
million refuse disposal tender. According to sources within the PEC, which was widely
expected to recall Gumede during Monday’s meeting, the structure resolved to
refer the report recommending her axing back to the PWC to avoid creating the
impression that she was being targeted. “The report that was submitted by the PWC only focused on
the Gumede matter. Some members of the PEC felt that other cases of ANC members
who have been charged with crimes in the province should also be covered by the
PWC’s investigation so that it does not seem like the leadership was targeting
her,” another source said. The PEC resolved to refer the report back to the PWC on the
back of threats by Gumede’s supporters to take the ANC to court should the PEC
endorse the recommendation that she should be axed from her mayoral position. However, the ANC alliance partner the SA Communist Party
(SACP) has threatened to organise massive protests should Gumede go back to
work. “We are engaging with the ANC at the provincial level so that decisive
action around this matter can be taken. This issue is paralysing the
municipality. If they don’t, the SACP will mobilise the community against the
mayor,” SACP eThekwini regional secretary Phumlani Mthembu said. The SACP, Mthembu said, believed that there still remained a
number of corruption cases involved Gumede that needed to be investigated. Despite the PEC not yet having endorsed the PWC’s
recommendation that Gumede be axed, the embattled mayor remains on suspension. “Two months ago the PEC resolved that she should be put on
suspension while the matter was being investigated by the PWC — that decision
still stands,” the PEC member said. Newly-appointed ANC spokesperson Ricardo Mthembu could not
be reached for comment on the PEC’s decision on Gumede. ANC provincial secretary Mdumiseni Ntuli is expected to
brief the media in Durban today on the outcomes of the PEC’s meeting.