The ANC broke the DA’s 12-year reign in Ward 30 when it won this week’s by-election, which saw the DA retaining only Ward 28. The northern wards went into the by-elections after their former DA councillors defected to the ANC early this year. On Wednesday, thousands went to the polling stations to elect their new leaders. The DA managed to retain Ward 28, where its candidate, Lucky Naicker, had a lead of 59 votes, with 48,7% of the votes cast compared to 73,2% it received in the 2016 municipal elections. However, the party lost Ward 30 with 1 423 to the ANC’s Sunny Naidoo. As a ward councillor, Naicker will serve the communities of Belfort, Bombay Heights, Newholmes and Khan Road. In Ward 30, Naidoo will represent the residents of Orient Heights, Dunveria, Raisethorpe, Allandale and Bakerville Heights on the City Council. On Thursday both Naidoo and Naicker told The Witness that they took their new responsibilities seriously and were ready to serve their communities. Naidoo thanked the voters “for giving the ANC a chance to show them what we can do”. “Now it’s important for us to deliver and certainly we will do everything we can. “I’m sure people will see a difference in the service delivery in the next year-and-a-half we have [before the next local government election],” said Naidoo. The father-of-two said for him contesting the elections was never about the position or the money, but being given another platform to serve his community — something he has been doing all his adult life as he served on several civic organisations. His goal is to forge a new working relationship between the municipality, community and other stakeholders with hopes to also attract investment to the northern areas as that would create job opportunities. Naicker said when it was first announced he was selected to stand as DA candidate for Ward 28, there were loud noises from certain quarters, especially the ANC. “They questioned my suitability as I was from Ward 30. The residents from Ward 28 felt their intelligence was being questioned and showed this through the ballot box.” He said as an activist for the DA and member of the community policing forum for many years, he was well aware of the issues of service delivery and crime affecting the northern suburbs. “What is blatantly obvious is that Msunduzi officials deliberately hinder service delivery to score political points over the opposition. Service delivery issues must be prioritised over political agendas,” he said. Political parties are now gearing up for next month’s by-elections as the voters of Imbali Stage 1, Tehuis, Unit CC, Imbali Lodge and Transit areas will also be going to the polls. The Ward 18 councillor position became vacant following the recent death of Sindisiwe Gwala. The area had more than 10 000 registered voters at the time of the 2016 local government elections. Who is Lucky Naicker? • Has a diploma in management. • Previously worked as farm supervisor for Rainbow Chickens and sales controller for Albany Bakeries. • Currently retired and devotes his energy to assisting his community. • Member of the Community Policing Forum. • Has two children with his wife, Roselind. Who is Sunny Naidoo? • President of the Sri Soobramoniar and Marriamen Temple. • Former president of the Pietermaritzburg and District Soccer Association. • Founding member of the National Sports Congress. • Married to Cookie Naidoo and has two sons and one grandchild.