Security has been tightened at the City Hall with weapons scanners at the entrance and guards stationed around the premises. This is in response to last week’s thunderflash explosion at the entrance of the council chamber. The incident collapsed a councillors’ workshop on the City’s turnaround strategy by the administrator, Sibusiso Sithole. On Wednesday more than 20 guards were stationed at various posts, inside and outside the City Hall. Even the acting City manager, Nelisiwe Ngcobo, was scanned when she walked in. Mayor Themba Njilo also told the council that prior to the meeting the SAPS team did a sweep in the offices and the chamber, and this would be a regular occurrence. He said last week’s incident caused a serious security concern and the municipality would do everything to prevent it or something similar from reoccurring. He said one of the councillors, Tholakele Dlamini, was admitted to the hospital as she had to seek medical help because of the explosion. “We cannot allow intimidation and disturbances during the time when our focus is on undertaking matters to turn around the status of the City,” he said. Mayor Njilo said investigations were under way to establish what happened. Councillors across political parties supported the commitment shown by Njilo in turning the City around. “We will not be deterred, under any circumstances, by anyone. We are not here in supporting the mayor as political parties, we are here supporting him as council,” said the ACDP’s Rienus Nie­mand. “We are going forward, we are cleaning this ship up and we are going to come out on the other side much better.” The AIC’s Nomalady Dlela said the explosion shook the members of the council because it touched on the issue of their safety. She said they wanted to see the perpetrators brought to book. The ANC’s Mtuza Mkhize called for a private investigation into the incident, saying it was a form of intimidation. He said it was clear there were some forces against the cleaning up of the rot that infected Msunduzi. “We have cameras here but we are being told that they were not working that day, why weren’t they?” he asked. He said some of the City’s guards and bodyguards that were on duty that day must also answer about their whereabouts when the thunderflash was set off because some of them were supposed to be outside the chamber.