Why do people stay in abusive relationships? This is a question many of us ask ourselves when we see
victims of gender-based violence persisting with abusive relationships. Experts have warned that outsiders should not be quick to
judge these people, as their reasons go far deeper than what meets the eye. On Monday, the country woke up to news that musician Mandla
“Mampintsha” Maphumulo had allegedly assaulted his partner Bongekile “Babes
Wodumo” Simelane, who is also in the entertainment industry. The alleged incident was captured in a video that went viral
on social media on Monday. Maphumulo is seen apparently beating Simelane in the video
which was beamed live on the gqom musician’s Instagram page. Many on social media said this was Simelane’s “final cry for
help” as news had surfaced last year that Maphumulo allegedly had a tendency to
physically assault her. While many pitied Simelane and called for Maphumulo’s urgent
arrest, others asked why she chose to stay with her alleged abuser. Victim lays charge so
he doesn’t hurt anyone else A local woman who was brave enough to lay assault charges
against her partner after he viciously attacked her, says she did so to ensure
that his “hideous act of violence did not go unpunished”. The 30-year-old mother of two, who asked not to be named,
was hospitalised after she was assaulted by her boyfriend of 14 years earlier
this year. “We had been dating on and off for 14 years. We met when we
were in high school. He was my first love,” she said. On the night of the assault, which flared up after a slight
misunderstanding, her partner punched and kicked her repeatedly and even
threated to slit her throat with an axe. “The attack came as a total shock to me, my family and his
family. Yes, he had slapped me around a couple of times but none of us thought
he was capable of that. “The first time he slapped me was after I had poured boiling
water on his hand a few years ago. I found out that he was cheating and out of
anger, I poured water on him. He didn’t retaliate immediately, he bottled his
anger up for two days. “The second incident was when I was pregnant with our second
child. I asked that we take a break because we both had a lot going on and he
hit me with his head on my forehead.” She reported the second incident to the police and when she
accompanied the police to his home, he had run away so the police left. “He
came back and started apologising and promised to change. He even asked his
aunt to ask me to give him a second chance and I went back to him,” she said. After the attack that left her in hospital, the woman learnt
that she was not her partner’s only victim. “I heard that he had knocked out
one of his ex’s front teeth, he left another woman with broken bones and
another woman told me that she left him after he had almost killed her. “When we were together he used to tell me that he would
never lay a hand on me but because his actions had gone unpunished previously,
he did it again to me and according to people who know all his shenanigans, I
got off easily. “That’s why I opened a case against him, so that he gets
punished for this and never does it to someone else. I still love him, he’s the
father of my children, but no matter how much I love him, he must learn that
hitting a woman is wrong. “Sometimes people need tough love to get out of bad habits.
I hope that this will help him change his ways,” said the woman. The woman advised other women in a similar relationships to
“seek help before it’s too late”. “The first time we broke up was when he broke my virginity.
I had thought I was ready but I realised later that I wasn’t and we broke up
because I was so angry at him.” We stay because ... Local psychologist Clive Willows says most people trapped in
abusive relationships stay there because of finances. They are unable to
support themselves or their children, so they choose to stay. “The more psychological reason victims of abuse stay, is
because abuse normally occurs in a cycle. The abuse is not permanent, it is
usually followed by explanations, rationalisation, pleas for forgiveness and
promises that things will change. “This becomes part of the cycle and the woman wants to
believe this to be true, hopes that it is true and therefore remains in the
relationship for as long as there is hope. They only leave when tolerance runs
out.” Willows says that while the efforts of campaigns and drives
against gender-based violence are important, they may only change the attitudes
of a few people but won’t change what is happening in society. “Despite all the commendable campaigns and the changed laws,
nothing will change unless we address the issue of how society breeds violent
people. Until then, we will never reduce the incidents of domestic violence. “That breeding of violence takes place in childhood, it
doesn’t suddenly appear in adulthood. How we are treating and bringing up out
children is what we should be focusing on. “We are seeing more violence at schools and in young people.
We need to know that this violence won’t simply vanish from these children as
they grow older. Adult violent behaviour can usually be traced to incidents of
violence in their childhood, not necessarily perpetrated against them but their
own violent behaviour,” said Willows. He says the problem is that parents put more emphasis on
providing for children and believe that is efficient childcare, but what hasn’t
been done is teaching them empathy. “We haven’t taught our children empathy, we haven’t taught
them the ability to firstly manage their own emotions and secondly to recognise
and respect the emotions of others. “Domestic violence is easy when you don’t have empathy and
you don’t recognise and respect the feelings of other people because you have a
sense of entitlement and you feel entitled to treat another person in a certain
way. Society is breeding narcissistic people,” he said. Willows says the rehabilitation of perpetrators can only
take place when the perpetrator makes a personal decision that they want to
manage their anger better. “By adulthood, the urge to be violent is deeply engraved and
is not something that one removes completely. Just like an alcoholic decides
not to drink but still remains an alcoholic, so are perpetrators of violence. “It’s a question of managing the violent behaviour but the
internal mechanisms are unlikely to be change,” said Willows. Women fear being
victimised again when reporting abuse Cookie Edwards, executive director of the KZN Network on
Violence Against Women and also a domestic violence survivor, said most women
stay because they hope that their partners will change. She said there are many other factors that force women to
stay with abusive partners, such as children, unemployment and emotional
dependency, where the woman says: “I love him and hope he will change”. Edwards said a contributing factor, especially for women who
are financially dependant on their partners, is that there are no alternatives
for them as there are not enough safety shelters available for abused women. “Even if a woman goes to a shelter, how will she manage with
no money because all she gets at the shelter is a roof over her head, safety,
toiletries and food. Another thing is that safety shelters can only house you
temporarily, what happens afterwards? “I have nothing against shelters as we always encourage
women to go to shelters but we need to make sure that there is a way forward.
We need to have that secondary stage where women are assisted in building
themselves up and finding jobs. I think there is only one such facility in
South Africa and that’s in Cape Town. We need more of these places,” she said. Edwards said she doesn’t condone what happened to Bongekile
“Babes Wodumo” Simelane, but asked why ordinary women who suffer at the hands
of their partners don’t get as much attention. “Babes’ matter received attention from the police commissioner.
Must you be a celeb to get police to jump in? How many women have been treated
badly when reporting such sensitive cases at police station? “That’s another reason women stay, they fear being
victimised again when reporting abuse.” Edwards said she suffered a broken jaw, broken ribs and was
almost killed several times in her previous marriage. “He [abusive husband] died the way he lived. He was a
womaniser, he went to clubs and he was murdered in town. I was unemployed and
had dropped out of primary school because of circumstances. “I had to draw from my inner strength and challenge myself
to be where I am today. I refuse to be a victim again, I am not a victim, but I
am a survivor. I’ve turned negatives to positives and want to help women who
are going through what I went through,” said Edwards. She said people cannot force women in abusive relationships
to just up and leave with no alternatives in place. “All you can do is give her moral support, listen to her
when she wants to vent, tell her about organisations out there that can help
her, and offer to accompany her when she decides that she needs to speak to
someone. There is help out there.” From experience, Edwards said it takes a lot to walk away
from an abusive relationship and try to rebuild yourself. “In an abusive
relationship you have no self-esteem and you feel helpless. You have to
overcome all of this and rebuild your confidence. So it’s important that people
around you offer their support. “I am now married to a wonderful man. I didn’t know there
were good men in the world. We’ll be celebrating our 30th wedding anniversary
later this month,” said Edwards. Girls made to believe
they must persevere Director of LifeLine Pietermaritzburg, Sinikiwe Biyela, said
70% of women stay in an abusive relationship and 70% drop charges against their
partners after reporting the matter to the police. She said the reason many women stay in abusive relationships
is mainly due to socialisation. “Young girls are groomed and socialised to believe that they
will have to persevere and make the relationship or marriage work. The church
also emphasises this belief — ‘The wise woman builds her house, but with her
own hands the foolish one tears hers down.’ “Therefore, women see themselves as failures and the ones to
be blamed for everything that is wrong in a relationship and because they don’t
want to be seen as failures, they stay and persevere, hoping that the situation
will change for the better.” Biyela said contributing factors include low self-esteem,
emotional or financial dependency, hope that the situation will improve, false
promises that it will never happen again, nice gifts and apologies, pressure
from the community and families not to humiliate the family, and fear of the
unknown. “The main reasons women drop charges are: they hope that the partner
will change, they are fearful, and they do not have faith in the justice
system.” Recalling an incident reported to LifeLine that she worked
on last year that left her completely shattered, Biyela said they assisted a
women who had her ear chopped off by her husband. “The husband claimed that the ear did not do its function,
and he decided to remove it. “The major problem is that women report abuse very late as
they keep hoping that the partner will eventually change. “Unfortunately, the longer they stay, the higher the
intensity of the abuse,” said Biyela. She advised people close to victims of abuse to stop blaming
the victim as this makes the situation worse. “People need to support the victim’s decision and provide
information on where to get help and the resources available to them. “Try to be patient with the victim as they explore other
options, don’t put lots of pressure on them as this will drive them straight
back into the hands of their abusers. “Also, start educating girls early to value themselves, and
to know that men are not oxygen, we do not need them in order to survive,” she
said. Biyela said they have a few shelters in KZN that take in
survivors of abuse. “Unfortunately, they are not publicised, in order to
protect the victims. If a person needs to be admitted to a shelter, they need
to contact LifeLine or the SAPS who will then transport them to a shelter,” she
said. Be financially
independent Dheran Ghela, a local financial adviser, advises women to be
proactive in ensuring that they are financially independent while in a
relationship. “Women must maintain their own bank accounts and store
accounts, and the ability to make financial decisions for themselves and have
proper input on relationship finances. They must have their own savings and
retirement plan. If you need to contribute or share money in a relationship,
set up a joint account where you can contribute for joint or family
responsibilities,” he said. Ghela says it is important for housewives in an abusive
relationship who are considering leaving their abusive partners to know their
rights in terms of what they can claim from their partners, if there is a split
in terms of pension fund share and maintenance that they can claim. Ghela suggests a joint account for couples where both
partners are employed and wish to consolidate their finances. He says women must ensure that they know how to budget. “They should look at ways to supplement their income via
savings and/or acquiring skills that can be converted into money either after
hours or on weekends, thereby building their own nest egg,” he said. 