“It was two hours of my life but it took me
almost three years after I was raped to start feeling normal again. Now I live
all my days to the fullest.” These are the words
of a Scottsville woman who was robbed, raped and subjected to repeated sexual
assaults in her home by a young assailant wielding a carving knife in 2008. Her rapist, Sanele
Shezi (20) was arrested within 24 hours of the incident and in September 2009
he was sentenced to 35 years in prison with a chance of parole only after he
has served 20 years in jail. With the
11-year-anniversary of her traumatic ordeal around the corner, the now
60-year-old woman, who asked not to be named, said her life changed
dramatically after the incident and she’d learned to focus on the positives in
life. “It happened on a
Friday night and the reality only really set in the next day,” said the woman. “On Saturday, after I
was raped, I heard there was another incident in town on Friday where a young
woman was gang-raped, wrapped in a blanket and stabbed multiple times. “I realised I am
still alive, that things could have been worse for me, and I focused on that
right from the beginning in trying to move forward in my life.” The woman said one of
the strangest things for her was the discovery that she and Shezi shared the
same birthday. “One of the things
that helped me with healing was that he was caught within 24 hours. It made a
collosal difference to know he was in police custody. “One of the first
things I learned was that you have to learn to accept help when it is offered
and friends are there to help. “There are no
obligations or keeping scores, they help because they want to.” She said for the
first three years after the incident, she’d felt “emotionless”. “I felt totally dead
inside. Then one day, I went to visit a friend with a small child. The little
girl ran up to me and gave me a hug and I immediately felt a shift. I thought,
‘I feel alive again’, maybe things can start feeling normal again”. The woman said her
company paid for her counselling sessions and although this helped with the
healing process, people should realise that just going for counselling is not
enough. “You have to work on yourself,” she said. To help her deal with
her trauma she makes “lists” of positives in her life and compares that to what
her rapist cannot do.  “I have a list of
all the things I have — a job, a roof over my head, the ability to celebrate my
birthday with friends. “I have also made a
list of all the things he cannot do. Through his own choices, he is in prison,
he will not have a family, he cannot go out with his friends and he is in
prison for his birthday every year. He will never have a normal life.” She said nothing will
change what happened to her but “you can change how you deal with it”. “Do not let it hold
you back.” The woman added that
she has also learned that she does not have to forgive her attacker to move on.
“In 10 years, he will be eligible for parole and I will be at his parole
hearing to make sure he does not leave that building,” she said. She said while
everyone is different and deals with trauma differently, she would encourage
rape survivors to develop new hobbies and interests. In her own case she
realised she has passion for wildlife and is especially fond of porcupines. “On
April 4 this year, I will celebrate 11 years of survival. One never knows what
the future holds and be positive where you can.”