Economic Development MEC Sihle Zikalala has hailed the department’s
new programme aimed at supporting township spaza shops as a “pioneering
intervention” by the provincial government. Addressing Mkhambathini residents at the Nembula
Sportsground, Zikalala said the initiative, called Bulk Buying and Warehousing Programme,
will turn tuck shop businesses into more profitable ventures for small business
owners. “The programme is aimed at lowering the cost of sales for
our small and emerging retailers in order for them to be competitive and to be
able to expand their market share and participate in the whole retail value
chain. “Its intention is to finally cut the middleman thereby
ensuring that our retailers enjoy economies of scale,” he said. The programme will see the department establishing a
distribution centre, where small businesses can order stock at discounted
prices. “We are implementing the programme in partnership with our
entity, the Ithala Development Finance Corporation, which acts as [the
department’s] implementing agent. Our overall agenda is to transform and
revitalise township and rural economies in order to foster inclusive growth.” Most local tuck shop owners who have been operating in
townships and rural areas were forced to either sell or rent out their
businesses to foreign national due to fierce competition within the sector. Zikalala said the programme will ensure that township small
businesses were sustainable. “Through it, rural and township SMMEs and
co-operatives can collectively buy directly from manufacturers or their
representative suppliers or distributors in order to get better pricing,
quality goods and be in stock at all times to compete fairly and grow their
businesses,” he said. While government would be giving local small businesses the
support they needed to run thriving businesses, the programme could only work
if business owners were committed to the initiative’s success. “According to research which was released last week, while
government can do so much to inculcate the spirit of entrepreneurship, the
person who runs the business is the most important success variable,” Zikalala
said. The department under Zikalala had in recent months been
playing a hands-on role in supporting private businesses in the province. Last year it facilitated the rescue of Glodina — one of
South Africa’s largest towel manufacturing companies, based in Hammarsdale. The
department’s efforts saw the Investment Development Corporation (IDC) pumping
millions of rands into the company to revive operations and save jobs.