Two bodybuilders have been charged with assault with intent
to do grievous bodily harm after being involved in a brawl with locals at the
popular Pot and Barrel pub in Hilton. Marcus William Daniel Reeves (23) and Chad Derrick Potgieter
(20) made a fleeting appearance in the Pietermaritzburg district court on Friday. It is alleged that they both assaulted Luke Adam on
February 9. They allegedly pushed him, hit him with their elbows and fisted
him, according to the charge sheet. Adam, an ANC Youth League member, arrived in court flanked
by more than 50 supporters, holding aloft placards, denouncing the assault and
calling for Reeves and Potgieter to be punished. However, they were stopped at the courthouse door and told
that they could not protest within 100 metres of the building. Disappointed, but still in high spirits, they converged
outside the palisade fence. Light rainfall did nothing to break up the crowd. Inside court, Magistrate Ashleigh Jennings was told that the
complainant, Adam, was not interested in mediation. He adjourned the case to
April for statements to be obtained. Jennings warned the young men to return to court or their
R1 000 bail would be revoked. One of their bail conditions is that they are not
allowed to communicate with or intimidate Adam. It is alleged that the bodybuilders and Adam, and his
friends, had an altercation outside the pub. It apparently started inside when
one of the friends mentioned that Reeves used to bully his brother at school. Reeves was informed of this remark and confronted the group
of friends. They allegedly grabbed a young woman in the group and when
Adam intervened, he was assaulted. He was allegedly further assaulted when he
tried to intervene when the woman’s brother was being assaulted. Adam’s nose was broken and he had to have 30 stitches. Bheki Nkosi, the head of security at the pub, said that the
bodybuilders have been banned from frequenting the establishment. Travis Grubb, a manager of the Pot and Barrel, said staff
they had sufficient security inside the pub but faced some challenges when
altercations happened outside, as in this case. “We have six security guards, plus a car guard and me, and
we extinguish altercations quickly when they happen inside. “We do go out to attend to incidents when they happen
outside, but it’s a very large area to cover,” he said, adding that staff did
patrol the car park area. “I have spoken to the landlord about possibly installing
extra lighting, but security inside is very sharp.” Grubb added that things occasionally got out of hand because
alcohol made people behave badly. 