St John’s Diocesan School for Girls has posted a heart-warming video on their Facebook page. By Friday, St John’s gangster-themed music video, the cover of Wiz Khalifa’s Black and Yellow hit song, had over 156 000 views, over 600 comments and had been shared well over 2 500 times. The video shows St John’s pupils, teachers, cleaners, kitchen staff, garden staff and security guards jamming to the hit song and singing along. The brains behind the video, Danielle Ashton, who is a design co-ordinator for the school’s marketing department, said the idea for the video started as a joke between herself and her husband. “We always have these dance videos at the school so I asked my husband for ideas for our next St Johns video. Last year we did it to a Mango Groove video. “I jokingly said maybe we should do a rap inspired video, and he asked to what song. “The first thing that came to my mind was Black and Yellow by Wiz Khalifa. I gave it more thought and decided to go ahead with it, considering that those are also our school colours,” she said.   A still image taken off the St John’s Black & Yellow video. Head of marketing at the school, Sarah Cole-Edwardes, said their main objective was to showcase the St John’s community as the family that they are in the most unique and fun way. “We are also very lucky because we are given the freedom to do all of this. Our lovely staff are always there to help out. This video is also a testimony of the kind of family we are at St Johns,” she said. Grade R pupil Ava Nel, who was also featured in the video, told Weekend Witness that dancing for the video was “great fun”. Katie Coetsee, a Grade 2 pupil, said she felt “so cool and crazy” while dancing for the gangster video and her classmate Zesihe Ndlela said she felt proud of her killer dance moves. Grade 5 pupil Lelomso Mkondweni, who only joined the school this year, said dancing for the video made her feel at home and like she belonged. Grade 8 pupil Sienna Porill said such videos show that their school is not just about learning but also allows them to have fun. A teacher, Belinda Kidd, who was seen dancing with four of her pupils in the video, said she enjoyed it as the girls helped her dust up her 80s dance moves. Phindile Mothoung, also a teacher, said she also had fun. “One of my girls came to me and said ‘Ms M, I don’t know what to do’, but I told her to do anything as this was supposed to be fun and carefree.” Mdumiseni Zondi, the school’s landscaper, said being featured in such videos goes to show “that we’re not just here to work but we are also part of the family”. “I don’t feel like a worker because the girls, teachers and parents all treat us like we are a big family,” said Zondi. Deputy principal, Dean Tyson, said such activities helped pupils see that teachers like himself are not just grumpy old people. Simon Moore, the school’s principal, said the video encapsulates all that is good about their school, “happiness, unity, spirit and love”.