Members of the ANC’s former military wing, uMkhonto weSizwe (MK) have been dragged into the party’s internal battles, with scores of members storming into the ANC’s Moses Mabhida regional offices in Pietermaritzburg on Wednesday. When The Witness arrived at the ANC offices in Burger Street, the protesters, many of them in MK regalia, had occupied the party’s conference room. Terrified ANC staff members watched on. The protesters refused to be interviewed, but sources said the protest was part of a campaign by former President Jacob Zuma’s supporters to dislodge the current regional leaders perceived to be supporters of President Cyril Ramaphosa. “They are trying to intimidate the ANC regional task team (RTT), which as you know is currently under attack from Zuma supporters who have even gone to the extent of taking the ANC to court in an attempt to get the RTT removed,” the source said. Zuma supporters in the region are demanding that the party’s provincial leadership should organise a regional conference where a new leadership to replace the current RTT can be elected. However, the ANC provincial leadership wants the elective conference to be held after the May 8 general elections. The MK Moses Mabhida regional leadership has distanced itself from the protesters, saying the occupiers were ill-disciplined people who had allowed themselves to be used in the ANC’s factional battles. “As the leadership in the Moses Mabhida region we have not sanctioned such a protest, and [we] were not briefed about the intentions of this group that went to the ANC offices,” MK Veterans Association (MKMVA) regional secretary Menzi Mkhize said. The MKMVA leadership, Mkhize said, will be taking disciplinary steps against any of the organisation’s members found to have participated in Wednesday’s sit-in. “We are currently trying to establish if those people who were protesting at the ANC offices were genuine MKMVA members.” When the protesters arrived at the ANC offices, MKMVA regional chairperson Mzo Kheswa was in the building. Mkhize said Kheswa was there for a scheduled meeting with the ANC regional leadership. “The MKMVA chairperson has nothing to with the protesters, they went there on their own,” he said.