Described as the “kingpin of Pietermaritzburg’s dark
underworld of drugs” by several police officers, former Eastwood Cash Money
Brothers gangster Shane Patchay was shot execution-style outside his home on
Thursday night. Patchay had pulled up to his driveway in Patrys Road in
Eastwood after football training with his social soccer club, Re-United, when
the gunmen struck. Police sources have said that two unknown gunmen were
waiting in Patchay’s driveway when he arrived home at around 10 pm on Thursday. The gunmen reportedly shot Patchay twice in the head and
twice in the chest before making their escape. Neighbours, who asked not to be named, said they were
sitting inside their house when they heard four gunshots ring out. “They
sounded so close. We went outside and saw Shane’s car parked in the driveway,
the driver’s door was open and his body was lying on the floor [outside the
car]. We didn’t see anything else, it was dark,” said the neighbour. His son declined to speak to Weekend Witness on Friday. Several police officers who cannot be named said the
shooting appeared to be a hit and may be gang-related. One said Patchay was known as a drug dealer among police but
that there was never enough evidence to arrest him. “It was definitely a hit
and there will be more coming. He was a kingpin in the drug world and he had a
lot of enemies.” He said lots of officers expected the hit could be coming. Another police officer said that Patchay was a drug kingpin
in Pietermaritzburg. “When Patchay was with the Cash Money Brothers, he was the
most ruthless of them all. He was still big in the drug world at the time of
his death but he always operated very carefully so he was never caught. He had
a lot of runners coming and doing the work for him. Patchay was the man who
dealt out punishment to those he thought needed it.” KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani
Zwane said a case of murder has been opened at the Mountain Rise police
station. “No arrests have been made and the matter is still under investigation,”
he said. Sketchy history with
the law ALTHOUGH Patchay was well-known in the Eastwood community
for his generosity towards others in need and his social soccer club, he also
had a sketchy history with the law. An article published by The
Witness in 2010 stated that Patchay was employed as a peace officer for
Msunduzi Municipality’s planning section and did not disclose his criminal record
to the municipality when applying for the job. Patchay’s criminal career
started in the early 1990s when he was found guilty of theft in 1990. Patchay
was also a member of the Cash Money Brothers as well as the bodyguard of the
infamous slain warlord, Sifiso Nkabinde. Nkabinde held Richmond in an iron grip of terror until he
was killed in January 1999. Patchay was charged with the murder of five ANC members,
including two councillors, in July 1997. The order for the murders allegedly
came from Nkabinde, who was expelled by the ANC. Patchay was acquitted of the
charges in May 1998. However, by July 1998 he was again in court with two
alleged members of the Cash Money Brothers on charges of murder, illegal
possession of a firearm and ammunition for the alleged killing of Eastwood
resident Andrew Joseph in 1996. The hearing started while Patchay was in jail awaiting trial
in connection with the Richmond killings. He was acquitted. In 2003 he was charged with the attempted murder of Garth
Donnelly. The charges were later withdrawn. By 2005 he was charged with the
murder of Kevin Johnson who was gunned down in Tarantaal Road near to where
Patchay lived, but charges were later dropped due to insufficient evidence. He
told the courts at the time that he was unemployed, but had acquired a minibus
which he used to transport children to school. ‘He was an open book’ A heartbroken friend who asked not to be named told Weekend Witness, “I heard about Shane
long before I had met him. “I heard all the wild stories, I imagined him to be this
wild gangster who just lost his head and turned over tables, I imagined gold
chains and sketchy women hanging off him, but I’ll never forget the day I
actually met him, the most humble, soft-spoken man, towering over the world but
still down to earth and so easy to speak to. “He was an open book, we spoke for hours, he was so
comfortable to be around and just felt like he was family. “And Shane was so respected, everywhere he went people would
come greet him, it wasn’t the kind of respect that fear brought, but the kind
of respect you get when you are good to people, he wasn’t just a friend to his
friends, he was a brother. When someone had a problem, they go to Shane to help
sort it out ... He protected the people he cared about, and always had an ear
to listen to what someone was going through,” said the friend. Tributes pour in for Patchay Soccial media posts mourning the death of Patchay were
plastered all over his Facebook wall on Friday. Friends and family took to the page to pay their respects
and share special memories of Patchay. Kyle Devon Cole posted on Patchay’s Facebook timeline: “Rest
in peace, my brother, my friend, CMB (Cash Money Brothers) for life. Rest in
power”. Tenille Gilbert‎ posted: “After hearing these horrible news
last night [Thursday night], I decided to go to bed. When I woke up, I hoped it
was all a dream and then I come on Facebook only to realise it’s not. I always
thought you were one of those people who would outlive everyone. You’re going
to be missed by a lot of people. Rest in peace Patchay. You’re with the other
original members now.” Cameron Greaves posted: “I just saw you last night at the
soccer grounds making jokes and telling me how you are coming to watch Young
Lions play rugby. “I’ll cherish all the jokes and times we had together. Rest
well Rods.” Genevieve Van Der Westhuizen posted: “I’m not sure I’ve
processed it all just yet. One of the happiest feelings is walking into Saki
and seeing you, towering above everyone else ... It’s been an honour to have you call me your sister.” 