Public drinking may
be a criminal offence but that does not stop dozens of Pietermaritzburg’s youth
from consuming liquor in parks, sports fields and even on the streets. Ratepayers and
residents who witness this behaviour on a regular basis blame the City for not
enforcing its own by-laws on public health. A Peter Kerchoff
Street resident said he would not care so much about the drinking if the
revellers didn’t make noise. He said every weekend was like a party with dozens
of cars parked on the side of the road playing loud music. “The more they drink,
the louder their voices get and sometimes they start fighting and wake up the
entire block with the shouting and screaming,” he said. He was worried about
the future of the country as it was the youth that engaged in what he described
as “reckless behaviour”. “We all know young
people drink but I think it’s getting out of hand. Sometimes you see them
passed out in their cars with the doors open and music blasting. I don’t know
if it’s a cry for help.” Another ratepayer who
owns a property on Pietermaritz Street said the drinking culture in the area
was fuelled by the five liquor outlets in a single block. These also happened
to be within metres of schools and homes. “Pay-day weekend is
the worst, but every weekend is dangerous, as people walk drunk in the street,
fights break out and noise continues up to 3 am.” She said it was now a
common sight to find drunk people sleeping on the pavements in the mornings and
the street gutters filled with broken glass. She had also observed
people driving with bottles of alcohol in their laps and drinking as they
drove. “Bylaw enforcement,
traffic enforcement and simple consideration for the lives of others are
non-existent in the city.” A local DJ, who asked
not to be named, said he had seen that some people now preferred buying their
liquor to go drink  outside the venues
that he played at. “It could also be
because many of them have not reached the legal age for drinking and they know
the establishment owners won’t allow them inside.” He said
Pietermaritzburg did not offer many choices in terms of entertainment for young
people. He said the
municipality should consider having a place where people could gather, enjoy
food and drinks outdoors. “If you have a
designated area it would be safer for everyone. “The municipality
could also deploy law enforcement officers to make sure that people under 18
are not drinking and they could also stop those who want to drive while drunk.” City spokesperson
Thobeka Mafumbatha did not directly respond to Weekend Witness’ question on
public drinking and enforcement. However, she
forwarded a copy of Msunduzi’s public health bylaws which state that “no
person(s) shall consume liquor at a public place unless authorised to do so by
the relevant authority.” Last week she told
Weekend Witness that the municipality had an idea to identify a designated area
that would be exclusive to revellers and make it attractive for partying
purposes exclusively, away from Alexandra Park where there were also complaints
of rowdiness. Sexual violence and drinking sprees The director of
LifeLine Pietermaritzburg, Sinikiwe Biyela, said the consequences for public
drinking were dire for victims of sexual violence. She said the
organisation dealt with dozens of cases where young women were raped during the
public drinking sprees. “We have cases where
their drinks were spiked and they were raped. When they wake up they don’t
remember what happened and the only thing they can prove was that there was
penetration. They don’t even know if it was one of their ‘friends’ that raped
them.” Her concern was that
these “parties” often took place where it was impossible to get CCTV footage to
assist the police during their investigating. Biyela said these
matters often did not make it to court as the police told the victims there was
nothing they could do since they were drunk and didn’t remember what happened. “Their friends also
refuse to come forward and testify because often their parents don’t even know
that they are part of these public drinking fests. So the victims get no
support from their own families — because they don’t tell them — and their
supposed friends they were partying with.” Police warn of public
drinking Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese warned
people that even drinking while sitting in your car in a public area was a
criminal offence. “When people engage in such behaviour, not only are they
engaging in a criminal behaviour, but they could also end up being victims of
crimes themselves once they are intoxicated.” He said criminals would most likely take advantage of them
if they see that they are not in a position to defend themselves.