A young man who allegedly raped a Chase Valley woman and held her hostage for eight hours at the weekend has been arrested. The 19-year-old man, from Mpolweni location, was arrested in Dalton on Sunday night, after allegedly attempting to sell goods stolen during the attack. Speaking to The Witness on Monday, Stanley Zondi, a CWP Security guard who assisted in the arrest, said he received an emergency call out to the Sweetlands Farm at about 6 pm on Sunday. When Zondi arrived at the farm, he was told that a youngster who tried to sell off suspected stolen items to workers had already fled into a nearby sugarcane field, leaving the items behind. Zondi said the quick-thinking workers had managed to snap a photograph of the man before he fled. The suspected stolen goods included a driver’s licence, a laptop, two digital cameras and clothing items. The vigilant security guard said after seeing the photograph he immediately recalled driving past the man on his way to the farm, and chased after him. About five kilometres away from the farm, Zondi spotted the man again, walking on a dirt road. “I didn’t want to scare him off, so I pulled over next to him and offered to give him a lift.” The unsuspecting youngster immediately jumped in and the security vehicle drove off. “He was shocked and panicked when I showed him the stolen items inside the car and asked who they belonged to. He attempted to jump off [out of the car] but the doors were already locked,” Zondi said. He said he drove back to the farm with the young man to confirm if it was indeed him in the photograph. “I knew that those goods had been stolen somewhere but I was shocked to hear of the horrific crime this young man had committed during the theft,” Zondi said. It was only after the assailant was handed over to Dalton SAPS that police established the driver’s licence had been reported stolen in the city. The man is expected to appear in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court soon. The daughter of the 56-year-old rape victim said on Monday her mother was still traumatised by the ordeal. “She is not in the good mental space but she is okay,” she said. The woman was treated at hospital after the incident but was allowed to return home. The daughter said it turned out that the assailant, who was not armed and did not use violence, had given her mother his name, which also turned out to be his real name. “He had most of her possessions that he stole except for her cell phone and [prepaid] electricity meter,” she said.