The City’s new general valuation roll was published for objection on March 4, but ratepayers who want to challenge the valuation of their properties only have until Tuesday, April 12 to do so. DA councillor Rooksana Ahmed said the 40-day objection period was inadequate as ratepayers had not received the section 49 notices which told them how much their properties were now worth. Last year, Msunduzi appointed eValuations to prepare the roll to come into effect for the 2019/20 financial year, starting in July. She said property owners needed time to consult independent valuers should they want to challenge the values provided. Ahmed said the delay in the issuing of the notices was unfair to ratepayers, who should have received them before the opening of the objection period. This was done in 2009 and 2014. “This year the municipality only placed adverts in the newspapers about where the roll is made available and there was no consideration for people who did not get those publications,” she said. She said those who wanted to lodge objections were initially asked to do so online but after complaints to the eValuations staff, they printed out hard copies for this purpose. Addressing a recent council meeting, acting city manager Neli Ngcobo said if the municipality postponed the process they “may be found wanting in terms of our own legislation”. A Northdale resident, who asked not to be named, went to the Civic Centre twice last week as the printed forms were initially not available. “I’m lodging an objection because if this roll goes ahead as it is, my rates will increase from R360 to R735.” Ward 31 committee member Vinolen Govender said the eValuations agents were willing to help ratepayers lodge objections. “We need to get the message out that the roll is now available. Maybe Msunduzi should consider publishing new adverts and printing pamphlets we can hand out in areas we live in.” Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said property owners should receive the section 49 notices this week. She said the number of objections received would have an effect on the process period. The outcome of the municipal valuer’s decisions would be mailed to objectors in phases as they were completed. “Objections will not be entertained by the municipality, unless timeously lodged on the prescribed objection form and submitted at the (correct) venues.” FACTBOX • Total value of properties on Msunduzi’s roll is approximately R62 billion, generating 25% of the municipality’s revenue in rates. • There are 86 000 properties on the new roll. • The roll is available at Sobantu municipal office, Old Edendale/Vulindela office, Gedi office in Imbali, Ashburton municipal offices, Civic Centre in Northdale and Msunduzi’s valuation division, which is on the fourth floor of the Professor Nyembezi Centre on Church Street. • Property owners can also go to www.msunduzi.gov.za and the link https://eservicesapp.evaluations.co.za/msunduzi will take them to a page where they can lodge objections.