Ratepayers and residents neighbouring Alexandra Park are fed
up with revellers — who’ve been described as bullies by the City — who subject
them to loud music then leave the area covered with litter after every weekend
of partying. Liquor bottles, takeaway food containers and other forms of
litter have become a common sight there after public holidays and weekends when
loud music keeps those living closeby up until the early hours of the morning. “People are openly drinking alcohol in [public] and leaving their
bottles of alcohol strewn all over the lawn … and playing music from their
vehicles at an excessive noise level,” said one of the ratepayers. Another resident said the problem was Msunduzi’s failure to
enforce its bylaws. He said the City should consider sending an official to
measure the noise levels around the park every weekend. “The municipality has these great bylaws but they are
completely useless if there is no will to enforce them,” he said. The park is one of the Pietermaritzburg’s main outdoor
public facilities and received a R12 million upgrade from the Department of
Environmental Affairs less than three years ago. On Friday Weekend Witness counted more than 15 bins inside
and around the park but most of the litter did not make it into them as it was
left on the ground where the revellers were believed to have gathered.  Municipal workers clean Alexandra Park on Friday. Nhlanhla Nkosi, who briefly rented an apartment  about 500 metres from Alexandra Park last
year, said there used to be a concert at the park every Sunday night. “People used to start gathering at the park around 6 pm. I
could hear loud music, people screaming and singing. “I could even hear what the DJ was saying. The concerts
would go on until the early hours of Monday morning and I could not sleep
because it literally felt like I was at those concerts.” He said it had become “so irritating” that after a month at
his apartment he started looking for a new place to stay. A resident of a retirement complex in the vicinity of the
park said that some Saturdays, the noise started at 10.30 am and continued
until after midnight. “You get this thump, thump, thump.” Even on Sundays it goes on until midnight which she said
makes her wonder if the noise makers did not have work or classes to attend on
Mondays. The aftermath of the raucous parties sees parts of the park
“ankle deep in litter”. “There are green bottles everywhere. Obviously it is a
drinking session. It’s absolutely disgusting. Outside the swimming pool is also
a mess,” she added. The woman said she did not mind noise occasionally, for
instance when there was a concert, but not as frequently as it happens. Over the years, she said she had complained numerous times
to the municipality and police. However, nothing happened. So, what’s the City doing about it? Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said there were
numerous sporting activities that people enjoyed around the park, including
cricket and soccer. “However, the park has now been overtaken by party revellers
who bully families and children, partying through the weekends,” she said. Mafumbatha said the challenges facing Alexandra Park also
included revellers who failed to use the ablutions facilities, which resulted
in urination on plants and used tissues being found all over the park. “This poses a hygiene risk and the stench of urine makes the
park an unpleasant place.” She said the City was enforcing the bylaws — including the
noise control regulation — and allegations of non-compliance were investigated
once complaints were received. People found guilty of contravening the noise control
regulation faced a fine not exceeding R20 000, or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years. Mafumbatha said people were urged to keep the area clean and
noise at acceptable levels. “The idea is to identify an area away from Alexandra Park
for revellers to gather [and] to provide a designated area that will be
exclusive to revellers and make it attractive for partying purposes
exclusively.” She said they want to create a safe, vibrant and enabling
environment for revellers to socialise in “which will give us an opportunity to
restore Alexandra Park to its original beauty and intended use,” said
Mafumbatha of future plans. Chairperson for the community services portfolio committee,
Siphamandla Khumalo, said the City was not against people having fun at the
precinct but their enjoyment must not cause a nuisance to others. “We are appealing to those who use the park and other
similar public facilities to respect them and treat them with care. These facilities
are there for everyone to enjoy so please leave them in a [state] you would
like to find them — use the bins and ablutions provided,” he said. To report violations of the environmental health bylaws
people can contact the relevant department on 033 392 2344 or the City’s call
centre on 080 0001 868. And the police? Alexandra police station spokesperson, Captain Kholeka
Mhlongo said sometimes fights broke out when people became intoxicated but they
had never had reports of serious crimes being committed around the park. “The complaints that we normally get are about loud music
and people littering but those have to do with municipal bylaws. She said that public areas such as parks did not have
restrictions on alcohol consumption such as the beaches. She said the police
were involved in the planning for major events around the precinct 