Grime, crime and the unstable economy are some of the
driving factors behind Maritzburgers selling off their properties to live
overseas. According to a survey by First National Bank’s property
unit, the selling of property in South Africa for the reason of emigrating has
increased substantially in recent years. FNB property sector strategist, John Loos, said emigration
home selling had risen from two percent in 2013 to 10% at the end of 2018. Loos said although real estate agents don’t ask motives for
selling, the reasons were “fairly obvious to deduce”. “It’s the poor performing economy and there is a lot of
uncertainty over future policy and the economic future of South Africa given a
lack of policy direction. Many people are perceiving better opportunities
elsewhere,” he said. The outlook for Pietermaritzburg is the same. Bruce Campbell of Natal Property Consultants said they had
also seen a surge in selling of property because of emigration in
Pietermaritzburg in the last six months. “People are fed up,” he said. “On top of the list is the non-service delivery of Msunduzi
Municipality,” he said. Campbell said he had recently sold a house in Hayfields
where the owner was emigrating to another country in Africa. “He commented on the lack of service in the municipality. It
starts at the top and goes all the way down and it’s very sad. There is just no
service delivery anymore.” Campbell said a lot of sellers who were leaving had mentioned
the “worsening state” of Pietermaritzburg and a lack of “political will”. “A lot of people are leaving Pietermaritzburg to go overseas
or to other places within the country,” he said. Pietermaritzburg estate agent Alan Martin also reiterated
that people had become frustrated with service delivery. “They are saying there isn’t a future for them in a city
that’s going downhill as it is. There is a feeling of negativity amongst a lot
of Maritzburg residents, especially people who have lived here for many years.” Martin said he has also had a few clients relocating their
businesses. “The problem is there is not a lot of business coming into
Pietermaritzburg and it’s impacting the property market,” Martin said. Munyaradzi Nkomo, the managing director of Strategies
Migration Services South Africa, told Weekend
Witness his firm has noticed an uptake in emigration inquiries since the
middle of last year. The country’s subsequent ratings downgrade paired with the
economic implications and former president Jacob Zuma’s policy changes had
spurred emigration interests. “When things got a bit shaky in South Africa, we noticed an
increase in inquiries. People wanted to know what their options were,” said
Nkomo. “We also saw an increase in people who were looking to leave
the country before the ANC conference in 2017. More and more people were keen
to move to seek a more stable environment to live in.” Reports that large numbers of white South Africans were
looking to leave the country because of farm murders and the land expropriation
issue were an exaggeration, Nkomo said. “People are moving in numbers. And it’s not just SA citizens
but foreigners who live in South Africa. In the global village we live in, the
country is competing with First World countries for human resources and the
difference is other countries have made it easier for a foreigner to reside in
the countries while we have made it harder.” Australia and the UK rank as some of the most popular
destinations for South Africans to emigrate to. “Australia is very popular,
then the UK, Canada and the U.S. We also often get inquiries for certain EU
countries such as Switzerland, Germany and the Netherlands.” A Pietermaritzburg resident, who asked to remain unnamed,
said he was considering emigrating to Canada. “My wife and I are looking to start a family and the outlook
on security and growth in this country is bleak,” the resident said. He said he was looking at Canada because of its “good
attributes and overall diversity”. “The cost of living, food, electricity [and] water has
increased. Although we are hard working professionals we are not living as
comfortably as it should be,” the resident said. Number of citizens
leaving expected to rise sharply It’s expected that the number of South Africans leaving the
country this year will rise sharply as politics, crime and job security are
cited as reasons to go. City Press reported recently that although neither the
Department of Home Affairs nor the International Relations Department keeps
figures on how many people are leaving the country for good, anecdotal evidence
suggests a sharp rise in emigration among South Africans seeking new lives
abroad as they become increasingly fearful of the current economic and
political situation. Experts predicted that last year would prove to be a record
year for emigration after a spike in 2015, when more than 25 000 citizens moved
abroad. The UK’s Office for National Statistics told City Press
that, in 2017, an estimated 7 300 people emigrated from South Africa to the UK. Ryan Rennison, managing director of UK visa solutions firm
Move Up, said the company had seen a 22% hike in inquiries to leave in the past
two years because of political uncertainty and economic decline. “There is a percentage of migrations motivated by concerns
of financial and educational stability. Few cases are motivated by concerns of
security alone,” Rennison told City Press. The most recent figures on emigration come from Stats SA’s
Community Survey 2016, a large-scale survey conducted between censuses. The survey showed that 97 460 South Africans had moved
abroad since 2006. The bulk of them were between the ages of 25 and 44. Of the almost 100 000 émigrés, 12,5% had moved to Australia,
12% to the UK, 6,5% to the U.S. and 4,6% to New Zealand. The trend is set to continue this year. Moira Luyckx, marketing manager for international removals
company Elliott Mobility, said they had dealt with 2 500 moves abroad last
year, “and we are expecting an approximately 20% increase”. Among the most popular destinations, she said, were New
Zealand, Canada, Australia, the UK, the U.S., France, Germany, Mauritius and
Panama. “People are emigrating for job and family prospects. There
are also some who are relocated by local and global corporations for their
specific skills,” she said. Stuttaford Van Lines’ marketing manager, Rocco Olivier, said
the firm was also expecting more clients this year. “We deal with thousands of families a year, with an average
increase of 15% year on year,” he said, adding that his clients — “a true
mixture of all ages and races” — move for various reasons, including financial,
political or family reasons. Others, he said, were transferred abroad within
multinational companies. Many, he added, were qualified and skilled workers. The most popular destinations his clients emigrate to are
the UK, Australia and New Zealand. Others move to the U.S., Canada, Asia, the
rest of Africa and parts of the Middle East. This, says the Homecoming Revolution — a Pan-African company
that encourages Africans to return home — is not good news. “We exist to bring Africa’s skills back. For every one
skilled African who returns home, they have a ripple effect of directly
creating 12 new jobs in the formal and informal sectors,” said managing
director Faye Tessendorf. She said there was a trend for predominantly white South
Africans to leave because they had access to dual nationality and ancestral
passports because of where their families came from. “What drives talent out of the country is political violence,
a rapid increase in crime and uncertainty in the economy,” she said. “Many young families just starting out unfortunately worry
for their children’s safety and the opportunities they will have. So, if they
move, they decide to do so just before their kids start school so that they are
not disrupted later on in life.” Home Affairs spokesperson David Hlabane referred inquiries
to the Department of International Relations and Co-operation as it “has a
voluntary online programme through which people going abroad may register
called Register South Africans Abroad”. Department spokesperson Ndivhuwo Mabaya said: “The only way
government knows that you are out of the country is when you stamp your
passport at the airport or any border. “That function is with the International Relations
Department, not ours. We also get information from them. We cannot help you
beyond here.” — City Press.