A ChaseValley woman was held hostage for eight hours in her own home by a rapist who ordered her to make him dinner after he had raped her on Saturday night. The Witness was told the woman (56) had returned to her home in Chase Valley around 5 pm oblivious of the intruder who was lying in wait for her inside her house. The woman’s daughter, who asked that the family not be named, said her mother was too traumatised by the eight-hour ordeal to talk clearly about it on Sunday. The woman was treated at hospital after the incident but was allowed to return home. When The Witness spoke to the rape survivor briefly by telephone, the wo-man was clearly distraught and crying and avoided all mention of the incident. Instead she spoke about how she has struggled in her life and complained that her electricity was being constantly disconnected by the municipality. She said without her prepaid electricity meter things would now be considerably more difficult for her. “I have lost everything. It has just been one bad thing after another.” The woman’s daughter said the assailant had broken into her mother’s house through a small window, but her mother did not notice anything out of place until she was already inside the house. As she walked along the passage in her house she saw that the door of a room that was always kept closed, was open. “She ran down the hallway and into the lounge and that is when the man grabbed her,” said the daughter. “He grabbed her by her throat and held her against the wall and told her she must keep quiet and that he was not there to harm her. “Then he raped her twice,” said the audibly emotional daughter. She said the rapist thereafter made her mother cook him dinner, among other things. “He made her cook for him and then made her download a game onto her laptop for him. “He sat with her and had long in-depth conversations with her, all the while drinking tea and coffee that he made my mom make for him. Sometimes there would be moments of silence. It was all very strange,” she said. She said the man was not armed and did not use violence but he did threaten to return to her home with friends and kill her and her animals if she reported the incident. “He stole her cell phone, laptop, pre-paid electricity meter, two cameras and her car,” she said. “He made my mom reverse up the driveway for him and then he drove off.” She said her mother had described him as a very poor driver. The vehicle was found abandoned near the Stay Easy at the Liberty Midlands Mall yesterday morning. “This morning we found a bunch of little bags filled with muthi in the air vents. One of the security guards who is now watching my mother’s house said it was muthi that people usually use to make a person sleep.” Pietermaritzburg spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a case of rape and theft of a car had been opened but no arrests have been made. Townhill Community Policing Forum (CPF) chairperson Megan Nicol said they were saddened to hear about the incident and that it was not something that occurred regularly in the area. She advised residents to always double-check that their doors and gates are locked before going to bed at night and to “always keep a panic button on you”, especially women. She added that having a small dog inside the house would also act as an early warning system.