More
than a year after embarking on its controversial electricity disconnections
drive, the City is finally getting its legal team to interpret its bylaws to
determine the legality of its actions. This was recently revealed by
acting municipal manager Neli Ngcobo following a meeting with the attorneys of
the Hilton Ratepayers Association (HRA) — which threatened to take Msunduzi to
court over the disconnections. The HRA challenged the legality
of most of Msunduzi’s disconnections, which allegedly flouted the City’s own
by-laws. The organisation mandated a
Pietermaritzburg law firm Tatham Wilkes Inc to engage the City on its members’
behalf. Ngcobo said during the recent
meeting the parties discussed the interpretation of the bylaw, which was “found
to be a challenge”. “We must first get our legal
[unit] — which was present at the meeting — to look at the bylaw and interpret
it for the municipality so that we make some changes if there is a need,” she
said. Ngcobo was responding to comments
by DA councillor Ross Strachan who warned council that the municipality was
inviting a big lawsuit over the unjust and incorrect power cuts. In an article in The
Witness published on February 2018, residents expressed their outrage
at hundreds of electricity meters being disconnected in a single weekend
without warning. Some said they were on prepaid
electricity but nonetheless were disconnected. In that article the City said
the disconnections were part of a programme that had started in September 2017. Although the exact figures were
not immediately available on Wednesday as to how many disconnections have been
carried out since, the drive has been ongoing and has targeted residential,
business and government departments that are alleged to be in arrears. Strachan said at the meeting that
he understood the reasons that Msunduzi had embarked on the extensive
disconnections campaign. This had to do with the City’s
multi-billion rand debtors book as some consumers were not paying for services
and that compromised the municipality’s finances. “But we’ve got a lawsuit
waiting to happen and it’s going to be a big lawsuit,” warned Strachan. ‘Some contractors break laws’ Strachan said some of the contractors who were
employed to carry out the disconnections were not abiding by the law. He said there were constant complaints about how
they forcefully entered people’s properties when they needed to access the
electricity meters. “They are breaking and entering. They are
trespassing into properties without any authority from the SAPS. They could be
anyone from the street — they don’t present any identification proving who they
are,” said Strachan. He said sometimes the contractors also cut off the
wrong properties and sometimes people were incorrectly disconnected — which was
unfair to those affected. The HRA said the municipality had a right to effect
legal disconnections but of late some people were being unjustly cut off. The Witness previously
reported that power cuts without prior notice having been issued to property
owners were procedurally unfair and in violation of consumers’ constitutional
rights. However, Msunduzi maintained that their
disconnections were within the confines of the law as notices were printed at
the bottom of the utility bill. Some of the HRA members who had been cut off were
reportedly later found to be up to date with their payments. There have also been reports that sometimes
consumers were given a “notice” by the contractors who came to disconnect their
power supply. HRA also had Tatham Wilkes Inc compile a circular
on Msunduzi’s right to disconnect electricity supply to residential customers,
which was distributed to its members last month. It states that the City’s right to disconnect
supply was subject to several requirements, including giving reasonable
opportunity to the consumer to make representations in respect of the intended
disconnection. The document further explains that the municipality
or its contractors had the right, in terms of both the bylaws and the Municipal
Systems Act, to access the property and the consumer may not obstruct such
access, for the purposes of effecting a legal disconnection. Scottsville councillor Vic Winterbach asked if it
would not be better for Msunduzi to place a moratorium on the disconnections
considering that clarity was still being sought on the interpretation of the
bylaw that governs them. Ngcobo appealed to the councillors to allow the
legal department to provide the interpretation of the bylaw before making any
decision on the matter. She said that should be in a month’s time. “The priority here — that all the councillors
should understand — [is that] our budgets in terms of the municipality are
based on the [revenue] collections. “So I’m really not understanding when you say let’s
put a moratorium. What are we saying because we haven’t even seen the
interpretation of the bylaw?” she said. 