City of rubbish. City of filth. City of sewage spills. City
of electricity outages and no water. 
City of broken hopes. City of despair. City of crisis. City of chaos. Sometimes it’s hard to love our city as we watch her degrade
to a point that both saddens and maddens us. It’s hard to be proud of her when
she looks and feels this way. Once again, people are saying our city is at one of her
lowest points ever. Has she reached her nadir? Is there any lower she could go
under the current woeful administration, that largely disengaged and
disinterested bunch at City Hall? Yesterday’s Witness headline shouted “FAILED CITY — Damning
auditor general report warns Msunduzi of total collapse”. It’s that bad. I had a wry “Maritzburg moment” as I surveyed the area
around the showgrounds this week for the opening of the provincial legislature.
We had originally been told that the opening would be held at the legislature
in Langalibalele Street as a cost-saving measure, but at the last moment we
realised it was once again being staged at the showgrounds. Huh? How did that
happen? Rumours abounded that this was because the city was so
filthy in the wake of the waste workers strike (good luck to them collecting
Christmas bonuses from residents this year…) that it was felt it couldn’t be
held in town. How could we showcase a prestigious event in a city that looked
like a rubbish tip? So, all of a sudden there was a flurry of activity around
the showgrounds. We found smooth tar on the section of Hyslop Road we’ve been
swerving around into oncoming traffic for the past few months as the
authorities doggedly held off repairing the water leak and subsequent road
damage there. The Chatterton Road traffic circle had been hastily mowed. To be
honest, it still looked pretty dreadful — ragged at the edges with weeds
arrogantly adorning the centre piece. I wondered how proud the City authorities were when their
various shortfalls were opened up to the scrutiny of dignitaries, VVIPs, and
honoured guests for the opening of the provincial Legislature in the Capital
city? How did the MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
Nomusa Dube-Ncube, feel about the state of her capital? Was she perhaps even
slightly sad having to admit to herself that this all happened on her watch? Empirical evidence — that which is based on or verifiable by
observation or experience rather than theory or pure logic — shows there has
been real neglect here and a mishandling of our municipality’s problems. We see
the degradation of our city. We feel it and live it. This cannot be denied,
glossed over or ignored. No PR pitch or person with a political spin PhD can
pretend this is not happening. Amidst these problems, the City’s audit results were
presented on Thursday. They made for very depressing reading. Again. Where is
the lasting, meaningful intervention, MEC Dube-Ncube? How can you still allow
them to continue trashing our city with their lack of capacity or ineptitude? What about you, Minister of Cooperative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, our own Maritzburg-born man, Zweli Mkhize? Aren­’t you
embarrassed of how your home town is being annihilated? Any serious
interventions planned? Then we heard the billing department went on strike. Again.
So a chaotic billing system declined further and frustrated residents await the
looming spectre of the electricity disconnection team emerging to darken their
doorsteps because they haven’t paid. Oh, the City told us on Thursday they were
not aware of this particular strike by the way. Amidst the hustle and bustle of the opening of the
legislature on Wednesday, driving to work at 8 am, the traffic lights were out
at the Willowton Road and Dr Chota Motala intersection. There had been a power
outage affecting nearby industries since the previous night. Again. And there, amidst the chaos, parked on opposite sides of the
intersection, were two Msunduzi traffic vehicles. No one was helping direct the
cars in the bedlam of the intersection. They were just parked off. A bit like
the style of the rest of the municipality, it seems to many. (Incidentally, is anyone else struck by how much we see
traffic officers standing around at robots and public places texting on their
cellphones? A bit reminiscent of Home Affairs?) The outage meant that while the provincial government was
telling us how they had failed at the Sopa, factories and organisations in the
heart of the city’s industrial hub — the employers of our people and drivers of
our economy — stood still. Again. Promises were made to restore power by such
and such a time, and were broken. Again. Workers were sent home and production ceased. How does this
all happen? And be allowed to continue happening? As I write this, the lights at work are flickering. It’s
ominous. It’s hard to have hope. But let’s not heap our despair on Pieter­maritzburg itself.
It’s the municipality that continues to mess with the sense of place and the
spirit of our city. We can only cling to hope that she’ll arise again, that
lovely old cliché, a phoenix out of the ashes. Now if the MEC for Cogta will just use a fire extinguisher
to quell the flames once and for all ... 
And if she won’t (again), maybe Zweli Mkhize will care enough to bring
in the big guns, those massive fire engines of administrators and corruption
busters from national government, and address the critical crisis of chaos in
our Capital. We deserve this.