IFP supporters on Sunday braved the wet weather and flocked to the Chatsworth Stadium in Durban to hear their leader, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, warn government against radical land policies. Tabling the IFP’s election manifesto, Buthelezi said it was critical for government to ensure that whatever land policy was adopted did not destroy the economy. “Otherwise we will find ourselves going the Zimbabwean route. The IFP wants to create a training infrastructure to ensure that the land can become productive. “This means introducing agricultural science at school level, and reopening agricultural training colleges. “Where land expropriation is necessary, we affirm the Constitution in its belief that there should be some level of compensation,” he said. The IFP, which became the third biggest party in the province in the 2014 general elections, registered phenomenal growth in the 2016 local government elections, winning back several rural municipalities it had lost to its splinter party, the NFP, during the 2011 elections. A former governing party in the province, the IFP lost its provincial governing party status to the ANC in the 2004 elections. Buthelezi appealed to KZN residents to give the IFP another opportunity to govern the province. “There is no need to reinvent the wheel with catchy slogans — we are still saying ‘Trust Us’ because integrity is still at the heart of the IFP, and it’s still the foundation for building social justice and economic justice for all,” he said. “It is time to take things into our own hands — this election must be about changing our nation’s leaders, to change the value system. We deserve a leadership that takes us from where we are now to where we all want to be.” The poor management of the economy, coupled by the high level of corruption in government, was indicative of a lack of moral leadership, he said. “What’s missing is the right value system; without the right value system the leadership of our country is bound to fail.” Buthelezi took a swipe at the ANC’s leadership for allowing corruption and poor administration to ruin the country’s economy. “We should be seeing high profile leaders jailed for looting the state. Instead, it’s business as usual while the Zondo commission brings us one revelation after the next of deeply entrenched corruption. “The ruling party has put up billboards everywhere saying ‘Grow South Africa’. But under their leadership our economy continues to shrink, growth has stagnated and jobs are being lost,” he said. The IFP leader, who has been at the helm of the party since its formation in 1975, used Sunday’s event to announce KwaHlabisa mayor, Velenkosini Hlabisa, as the party’s KZN premier candidate.