Convicted fraudster and businessman Visham Panday has vowed
to combat corruption, incompetence and abuse of state resources through his
recently-formed non-profit organisation. Panday — who grew up in Northdale — said in his recent
litigations he encountered a litany of corruption and was only able to pull
through because of the assistance of his legal team but many victims of graft
did not know who to turn to. He said this inspired him to do something to assist the
government and law enforcement agencies to deal with different forms of
unethical conduct. “... The battle against corruption and incompetence with our
public sector is an ardent one and I vowed to create a platform to be a voice
for those who lack the resources and expertise to stand for their
constitutional rights,” he told Weekend Witness. The Visham Panday Anti-Corruption NGO’s offices will be at
the Palm Boulevard, in Umhlanga, but its founder said they would be working
with people from all walks of life. He said the aim of the organisation was to assist those who
had exhausted all avenues of relief in their battle against corruption and
fight against exploitation. “I am mindful that many may abuse our facilities with
malicious intent to defame others, so we will thoroughly [assess] each
application before accepting the case.” Panday said they would not just be focusing on the graft
committed by state representatives but also in the private sector. However, the
organisation would not be taking legal action or investigating those accused of
misconduct. “We are not a law unto ourselves but instead are voices for
those who are victimised by corruption and will act on their behalf or guide
them towards the correct reliefs.” He said they would also be looking into collaborating with
like-minded organisations in the future so they could reach more people. “There are many silent heroes within our communities with
courageous and selfless hearts and they will have our full support and
hopefully lend their expertise towards our fight against corruption.” While most NPOs have crumbled due to financial constraints,
Panday said his would be self-funded. Commenting on his previous record after being convicted for
a crime, Panday said people had no reason to doubt him because his commitment
to fighting corruption, bribery, exploitation and intimidation was genuine. “It is human nature to make mistakes, however, if we can
learn from our experiences instead of being defined by them then we have
evolved. “Reform and selflessness should be every South Africans’
goal. “Innocent victims deserve a helping hand in fighting
corruption and it is public knowledge that I am a supporter of fairness and
justice.” He said many who engaged with him or have read his 2016
biography often commended and encouraged him to help others. “I am deeply
passionate about being a part of the solution instead of harping on a problem.” Panday was aware that some people who have publicly taken a
stand against corruption had been subjected to threats and violence. He said he
had also been a victim of such treatment in the past but he would continue “my
endeavours with fortitude because too many people turn a blind eye to
corruption until they themselves are victims”. Visham Panday can be contacted on vishamp1979@gmail.com