A property on Prince Alfred Street, continues to be at the centre of “confusion and conflict” between local businessman, Yunus Goga and security guard, Bongumusa Dlamini. Goga bought the property legitimately, but Dlamini is claiming rights to tenancy. Last week, The Witness reported that Goga, who bought the property from Sinothando Construction CC, and was still in the process of registering it under his name, was evicted by Dlamini and the police. Read: Was it a house hijacking? Dlamini, who has since obtained an interim protection order against Goga, said he has been occupying the house for over 10 years. He told The Witness a portion of the property, which is divided into three units, belonged to his former employer “Richard Faul” of WellCol Prop CC. However, he could not provide The Witness with the contact details of Faul, whom he said had since relocated to Cape Town. Dlamini said he has not spoken to Faul in years. Dlamini is in possession of a letter from the Deeds Office and a Msunduzi Municipality utility bill statement, which state that the unit he was occupying is registered under WellCol Prop CC. Dlamini said he was not disputing that Goga had bought the property, but states that he only bought a portion of it. He told The Witness that while there was only one entry point to the property, it is divided into three units, which are owned by different people. Sinothando Construction CC, which sold the property to Goga, only owned one unit, Dlamini added. “I tried explaining to him that he had no right over Mr Faul’s unit and he insists that he bought the entire property. I want him to show me proof of that transaction,” Dlamini said. He also claimed that he has been subjected to harassment and abuse from Goga, which was what led him to approach the courts for an interim protection order. The interim protection order states that Goga should not insult, threaten or remove Dlamini from the property unless he has proof that the unit belongs to him. “He can threaten and insult me but I will go back to that property until Mr Faul tells me otherwise,” he insisted. Goga told The Witness on Tuesday that he was not interested in what Dlamini had to say, unless he refers him to the alleged owners of the property. “Who is this owner he is talking about? I want to clarify this before the transfer takes place. He [Dlamini] must tell the owner to contact me so we can resolve the issue once and for all,” Goga said. He said when he bought the property, the title deed stated that the units were amalgamated. “I bought that entire property,” he added.