It’s something that many of us may take for
granted — signing the organ donation pledge online or having the sticker on our
vehicle licence. It is also perhaps the most profound act of generosity
anyone can make; the promise that when we die, we will give someone else,
likely a stranger, a desperately needed liver, kidney, or even a heart, and
possibly a whole new life. Samantha Nicholls, executive director of the Organ Donor
Foundation of SA [ODF], said the foundation creates awareness and educates the
public about organ and tissue donation. She described organ donation as the process of surgically
removing an organ or tissue from one person (the organ donor) and placing it
into another person (the recipient). Transplantation is necessary because the recipient’s organ
has failed or has been damaged by disease or injury. You can donate your heart, lungs, liver, kidneys and
pancreas by signing up to be an organ donor and allow that your organs be
harvested after you die. Nicholls said one body can save up to seven lives with
these five organs. She said donating your tissue, corneas, skin, bone and heart
valves can improve the quality of life of up to 50 people. “There is such a
desperate need for organs and tissue. Thousands of patients need organs and
only a few hundred receive a second chance at life. Many adults and children
die as a result of the shortage of organs and tissue,” she said. Nicholls said ODF has approximately 300 000 registered
donors, but less than 600 transplants are performed, both organs and corneas,
each year. Nicholls said people can donate a kidney while they’re alive
or a part of their liver. She said the doctors determine which organs and tissue can
be used at the time of death. “If someone is a potential donor on a ventilator and has
been diagnosed brain dead by two doctors who are independent of the transplant
team, a transplant or tissue co-ordinator will discuss the option of organ and
tissue donation with the family.” Nicholls said even if someone was not registered as a donor,
the relatives can sign consent forms to have their organs donated. Give someone a chance of life and be a donor Ayanda Nkosi  Ayanda Nkosi. , who has been on the organ transfer
waiting list for the past five years, has been very vocal on her social media
about organ donation and is encouraging people to be open-minded about it. Nkosi (36) was diagnosed with stage-five kidney failure in
2014. “I’ve had all the members of my family tested but
unfortunately they are not compatible with me, so it’s just been a waiting
game,” she said.  Nkosi, who used to work as a journalist, said she was forced
to stop working due to her deteriorating medical condition. “I have four hours of dialysis three times a week, which
makes it pretty impossible to go to work afterwards. Dialysis interferes with
your life; it leaves you tired and weak. “I used to travel overseas a lot but I can’t travel anymore
because it’s such a huge inconvenience as I’d need to look for a place to
dialyse and that’s extra costs,” she said. Nkosi said fortunately she is on medical aid and that her
family is very supportive. “It’s been tough for them as well because we don’t have any
history of kidney disease in my family. The kidney failure came as a huge shock
to me, I’ve always been a healthy person and led a healthy life. “The contributing factor was my high blood pressure which is
one of the common reasons for kidney failure,” she said. “People are dying everyday unnecessarily. Your kidneys or
organs are no good to you when you’re dead so why not give another person a
chance to live. In the black culture, organ donation is a taboo subject. Some
of the black people I’ve spoken to are very resistant and always play the ‘it’s
against my culture’ card. “That is why you find that organ donation is very uncommon
among black people, whereas in families of other races you find that every
member of the family is registered as an organ donor. “It’s also important to educate people that they can donate
some of their organs while they’re still alive and not be affected in anyway. “I wish South Africa would follow examples of other
countries like Spain, where everyone is automatically born as a donor, but can
choose to opt out. If this country had the same system, many lives would be saved,”
she said. Nkosi went on to encourage people to register and spread the
word. “You are doing a good deed. Your one body can save seven lives.” How do you thank someone for saving your life? “I just cannot begin to express my gratitude to the selfless
person who died and donated their liver to me so I could be here today.” These are the words of Dr John Buyers (59) from Hilton, who
is a recipient of a liver donation. Buyers, who is the CEO of Preformed Line Products SA, said
he stared experiencing stomach pain five years ago. He was diagnosed with a
liver disease called alpha antitrypsin deficiency. “I was put on medication
that helped manage the condition, but I was also told that some people can live
with the condition their entire lives and be okay and sometimes the medication
might stop working and other medical avenues would need to be explored.  Dr John Buyers. “I tried to keep fit, but I eventually became very sick. A
specialist doctor realised I needed to get on a liver transplant programme
because my liver was basically finished,” he said. He was then transferred to the Wits University Donald Gordon
Medical Centre and Transplant Clinic in Johannesburg where he underwent
numerous tests and was put on the organ waiting list. He was told that he would
have to wait for three to six months, or even longer. “I went home and was frustrated. I couldn’t work and my body
was big and bloated because water wasn’t leaving my body as it should. “Two and a half weeks later, I got a call from the hospital
and I was told that I needed to rush to Jo’burg for the transplant. I even had
a bag already packed like a pregnant woman and as soon as the call came, we
rushed there,” he said. After hours of more daunting tests, Buyers went into theatre
on August 9, at 5.30 pm. “I remember the nurse who was prepping me for surgery
explaining what was going to happen. She said I would be put under anaesthetic
and when I woke up, the first thing I would be told would be to breathe. She
said if I was unable to breathe on my own, I would be put on a ventilator to
help me breathe. She said I should try hard to breathe. I kid you not, it was
exactly like that. I remember someone saying to me ‘breathe, breathe’ and I
remember gasping for dear life remembering what the nurse said. That was the
first and biggest milestone I overcame,” he said. He said his post-surgery recovery was faster than they had
anticipated and he was out of hospital after 14 days and allowed to go back to
work after about three months. He was then asked to write an anonymous letter
to thank the family of his organ donor. “It took me a long time to write the
letter because I just didn’t know how to express my gratitude in words. How do
you begin to say thank you to someone for saving your life? It’s a huge task to
write this down. It was emotional but I eventually did it,” he said. Buyers said he went back to varsity to complete his
doctorate studies and is leading a healthy lifestyle and encourages others to
be opened-minded about organ donation. “If people didn’t donate organs I
wouldn’t be here. It’s doing something to help someone else. I encourage
everybody now. My family members are registered donors and most of my
colleagues too.” The darker side of organ transfers Because of the huge demand for human organs across the
globe, there have been several reports of people being targeted while visiting
foreign countries and killed for their organs, which are then sold on the black
market. Similarities in the cases of two missing South Africans
living and working in Vietnam have revealed a pattern that indicates a
possibility that organ harvesting was involved, according to Gift of the Givers
founder Dr Imtiaz Sooliman. He was speaking about John Bothma and Mushfiq Daniels who
lived in the same city in Vietnam where they worked as teachers. Both
befriended an American woman and then went missing. Bothma was last seen in Ho Chi Minh City on May 18, while
Daniels’ family last heard from him on July 3. Gift of the Givers often assists families who have loved
ones in distress overseas. Speaking to Weekend Witness, Sooliman said he still believes
strongly that the disappearance of Bothma and Daniels is linked to organ
harvesting. “How many weeks have gone by now? With each day that goes by it’s
more likely that organ harvesting might be the reason they disappeared.” Sooliman said that in February, the Vietnamese government
bust a massive organ trafficking ring inside Vietnam. “There is a real and big demand for organs in and around
Vietnam. We are told that in China you can be paid $2 500 [about R3 700] for a
kidney,” he said. Sooliman said Gift of the Givers has passed on all its
findings on Bothma and Daniels’ disappearance to state security officials who
are working with the Vietnamese government to investigate the matter further. He added that he suspects that foreign nationals were being
targeted because they are more vulnerable in a foreign country. “Targeting
someone who is not from around the area does not create a lot of attention as
not many people will miss them initially, unlike targeting someone from your
village or your city as when they disappear everyone wants to know what
happened. Foreigners are targeted because they don’t have any
relatives around, often don’t have much family or financial support and if they
disappear, [initially] no one will notice that they have gone missing,” he
said.