The ambitious-looking
organisers of the new Capital City Marathon have come out to refute claims that
their race is part of a master plan to revive the defunct Maritzburg City
Marathon. The Capital City
Marathon was officially launched at the Golden Horse Casino in the city on Thursday,
almost seven months after it was confirmed that the Maritzburg City Marathon is
no more. Present at the launch
was Athletics South Africa president Aleck Skosana. The new race will
take place on February 23, which is pretty much around the same time the old
organisers used to host their race, which was a popular Comrades Marathon
qualifier. The chairperson of
the Capital City Marathon, Steve Mkasi, said the new race is being organised by
four local athletics clubs — Maritzburg City, Phuma KZN, Amaqhawe
and Abasubathi. “The race is not a
revival of the Maritzburg City Marathon,” he said. “We are not the
Maritzburg City Marathon and we are not related to the Maritzburg City
Marathon. “We are not cousins,
not even distant cousins, we hope to not ever be cousins because you can’t be a
cousin with a dead person,” he said. “This is a new baby.
The Maritzburg City Marathon celebrated the city of Pietermaritzburg. Capital
City Marathon celebrates Pietermaritzburg as the capital of KwaZulu-Natal; we
are celebrating the province. “If the capital city
was Durban, we would host this event in Durban. But the capital city is
Pietermaritzburg and it happened that the Maritzburg City Marathon closed its
doors and it opened the market for us to host the race here without any
confliction of dates and other things,” said Mkasi. The reason for the
demise of the Maritzburg City Marathon was a lack of support from Msunduzi
Municipality due “to cost-cutting measures” and traffic issues. However, Mkasi said
the municipality has promised to support the new race. “The discussions are
profitable. Msunduzi Municipality, with all its challenges, has committed
itself to things that we asked from them,” said Mkasi. “Chief among them was
to get an office allocated to the race, at the athletics stadium. The
municipality has committed to helping us.” Sources have told The
Witness that the reason for the demise of the old race was that the
relationship between the organisers and the local government had gone sour. The new race, which
will be a Two Oceans and Comrades Marathon qualifier, will accommodate only 8 000 runners. In the 42,2 km, 3 500 runners will be allowed, while the
21,1 km will accommodate 2 500
runners, and the 10 km
will accommodate 2 000
runners. The winner of the
marathon will pocket R10 000,
while the half-marathon winner will take home R2 500. The 10 km winner will receive prize money of
R1 500. 