Social workers at the Child and Welfare Society of Pietermaritzburg on Hoosen Haffejee Street face a setback after an apparent burglary left four vehicles vandalised. The four vehicles — an Avanza, Toyota Tazz, Opel and VW Polo — were vandalised at the weekend, allegedly by vagrants. The workers got to work on Monday and found some of the cars’ axles left bare and balanced on blocks. Aniel Kumar, Child and Welfare Society of Pietermaritzburg financial officer, said they found the cars on cinder blocks, stripped of their wheels. The office is a stone’s throw away from the SAPS building on Hoosen Haffejee Street. It appears that at about 8 pm on Sunday, a passerby from the nearest block of flats spotted vagrants carrying car parts, including spare wheels. The passerby called the police, who managed to arrest one of the suspects. Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese, Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson, confirmed that a man was arrested for theft out of motor vehicles. He is expected to appear in court soon. Kumar said they suspect that the alleged thieves scaled the palisade wall and removed wheels from cars parked in the facility’s driveway, hoisting the stolen tyres back over onto the street. “They smashed the windows, took wheels, batteries and ripped out all the spare tyres from the boots,” he said. “These vehicles are used by the society to transport children and go and see families requiring help across the city. “It’s school holidays and there are problems with children. The social workers can’t use these vehicles if they are damaged. Just this morning [Wednesday] we had clients that we couldn’t transport.” Kumar added: “This is the worst damage we have had. We can blame Mother Nature when the storms come but it is sad when humans do something like this when we try to protect children and families in Pietermaritzburg.” He said following the incident, social workers at the society had been forced to cancel some appointments. “They have to try and spread their workload until we sort these vehicles out. Although we have insurance, we have to pay excess and it’s unnecessary costs that could be used elsewhere,” Kumar added.