A Pietermaritzburg woman and her 21-year-old son are nursing their injuries after they were brazenly assaulted in a “queue rage” incident while grocery shopping. The mother and son got into a brawl at a grocery shop in the CBD last Tuesday. Their opponent tried to jump the queue which resulted in a fight breaking out. The traumatised Sobantu woman, who asked to remain unnamed, suffered injuries to the hand and head during the physical altercation. She was discharged from hospital on Wednesday. She had been standing at the till waiting to pay for the groceries when the man stood behind her. “I was busy offloading my groceries. He placed his grocery items on the counter. I moved my things to separate the items. That’s when hell broke loose,” she said. The mother of four said the unknown man took his groceries and moved to another till point while murmuring something under his breath. “I didn’t hear what he was saying but he moved to another aisle and I carried on paying for my groceries. Moments later, my son who had gone to fetch an item from one of the aisles joined me in the queue.” The mother of four said while she was paying, the man starting hurling obscenities at her. “He called me a b****. I asked him why he was swearing at me. While I was still shocked by that, he moved over to our aisle and started shoving me violently aside. When my son tried to intervene, he punched him. “I got up and retaliated by kicking him. He told me that he would kick me in the face. He then pushed me, and I fell on the floor and he continued to kick me.” An eyewitness, who also asked to remain unnamed, said the man had demanded to pay first while the woman was still waiting for her son at the till point. “It was quite chaotic. Other members of the public had to intervene. They restrained the man and others assaulted him. “People have no common courtesy anymore. Sales assistants are also at the receiving end of shoppers’ frustration because of the queues and we have to put our heads down and take it,” the eyewitness said. The woman said during the altercation, her shopping packets also went flying and she lost her grocery items. She said what hurt her the most was that the security guards at the store all watched while they were being attacked. “None of the security guards bothered to help us or to even call the police. They were useless and my son could have been killed.” “They [security guards] watched while my son and I were being attacked.” “I don’t understand why people walk around carrying so much anger in them and they take it out on the wrong people. The incident has left me under immense trauma,” she said. She said her son was still traumatised by the attack and, for that reason, she would leave no stone unturned to get the culprit arrested. The woman’s son suffered injuries to his head. While she tried to open a case of assault against her alleged attacker, the woman said she was told by police that the man had already opened a case against her. “He [investigation officer] advised that we meet with the man [today] to try and reach an amicable solution,” she added. Efforts to get comment from the supermarket on Thursday were unsuccessful.