A new type of criminal is in town. Three “well-dressed women” have been targeting the Montrose area, pretending to look at houses on show while they are really there to burgle the homes of valuable belongings. Montrose had three incidents in just one day on August 28 with a case of theft opened at the Townhill police station on August 29. According to the community, a white Suzuki with the registration plates ND 622986 is believed to be involved with the three women being the occupants who arrive in the car. Townhill CPF chair Megan Nicol said the women are targeting homes with “For Sale” boards up. “They inquire about viewing the property and imply they have been in contact with the estate agent. “In one case the women were allowed in by the domestic worker. On reviewing the [CCTV] footage, the one woman can clearly be seen rummaging through drawers and a wallet is stolen containing cash,” said Nicol. She said the matter had been handed over to Townhill police station along with video footage from all three houses that were visited by the women. “Please do not allow anyone onto your property without proper verification. Please train your staff and family as well to only let a person inside the property if a prior arrangement has been made. Do not let anyone in who is not expected to be at the house,” warned Nicol. Pietermaritzburg estate agents said they had heard about the incident and some agents said they had experienced similar occurrences. A Remax Midlands estate agent, Arno Pretorius, said he had a few incidents several years ago where a couple from Johannesburg came to look at an expensive house. He said the man had gone to the toilet and Pretorius was a little suspicious so he waited outside the door for him. He said a few days later he heard from other agencies that the couple had burgled houses on show but luckily not the house Pretorius was showing. He said there was another incident about three years ago in Ashburton where a house was for sale. He said the domestic worker was at the house by herself and a number of men stormed in and stole firearms. “It is getting worse and I think a few agencies are looking at having two agents per house just so everyone is more vigilant.” An agent at Infoprop said if a person did not have an ID and a prior appointment to view the house they would not be allowed inside. A Wakefields estate agent said they had started advising their clients not to keep a “for sale” sign outside the house and that many people had taken the advice. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said two cases of theft had been opened at Townhill police station and that both cases involved the three well-dressed women stealing from houses with “For Sale” signs posted. He warned the public to remain vigilant and not to let people enter the property if they have not made any appointments or arrangements.