A 15-year-old boy sustained a deep cut to his cheek and other injuries after being allegedly hit with a knuckle duster during a fight with a fellow pupil at Kharina Secondary School in Northdale. Both sets of parents have opened assault charges. The school will hold a tribunal on Wednesday over the fight. A video circulated on social media shows the boys in a heated fight, grabbing and punching each other while their peers look on. The mother of the 15-year-old believed the boy he fought with — a 17-year-old — had attacked her son with a pair of scissors. She said the fight happened because of a disagreement over a girl. “There was a third boy who likes a girl who likes my son. So that boy [the third boy] called an older boy [the 17-year-old] to fight my son. “I only laid a charge because he poked my son. He had a cut on his face and other injuries. It was very scary,” said the mother, who added that her son had to be taken to hospital. “I was very traumatised. I was at work when it happened. The cut just missed his eye. What if this happened to another child?” But the mother of the 17-year-old claimed her son simply stood up to the boy who had a history of bullying him. “He came up to my child during the break and wanted to fight at a nearby tuckshop. My son went to speak to him after school to try to squash the fight. But he [the other boy] said he wanted to ‘teach this laaitie a lesson’.” She denied the 15-year-old was cut on the cheek by a pair of scissors, but rather because a plastic necklace her son was wearing “somehow got entangled on his fist” during the fracas. “Either way my son had to defend himself. He’s sorry about it and I reprimanded him. I opened a counter charge because my son needed X-rays because he had internal injuries and sustained lumps to his head and jaw.” Ward 31 “war room” chairperson Venolin Govender said the incident was brought to his attention and he has tried to mediate. He said both parties met with police on Tuesday. “We don’t want them to have criminal records. School violence is a big problem so maybe the school can suspend them or something to teach them a lesson,” he said. He believes both sides may drop the cases. Police confirmed two cases of assault with intent to commit grievous bodily harm have been opened. KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi condemned the incident. “A school should be a safe place for all pupils, not a place for fighting and inflicting pain to one another.” He referenced MEC Kwazi Mshengu’s launching of a new programme to curb school violence on Tuesday.