"Rest in peace has become more popular than our national anthem. “When will it stop? When will women, children and even men not be killed in this barbaric manner?” These were some of the immediate reactions on social media after news that 22-year-old University of KwaZulu-Natal Westville student Snethemba Ndlovu was stabbed to death went viral on Monday. News of Ndlovu’s death comes days after protest action in parts of the country aimed at shining the spotlight on violence against women and children. Ndlovu, a final-year Bachelor of Administration degree student, was stabbed on Saturday night after attending the annual motorsport event, Msinga Driftkhana. Captain Nqobile Gwala, the KZN police spokesperson, said the incident happened at the Sidakeni Reserve in Msinga. She said Ndlovu was stabbed below the left armpit and in the stomach. She was taken to hospital, but died on Monday morning. A case of murder has been opened. No arrests have been made yet. Ndlovu, from Inanda, Durban, had been hired as one of the hostesses at the event. In a statement issued on social media on Monday, Msinga Driftkhana said: “After the end of the shift for the hostesses at 10 pm on Saturday, all the hostesses were briefed by their director that transportation was arranged ... and that they were to leave the venue to where they were accommodated, about 500 m from the project venue.” Some of the hostesses stayed behind to watch the musical performances. “Reports received also state that the group of ladies who remained behind later left the project venue, walking to their accommodation. “On their way, sadly, one of them was attacked by unknown men and later passed away in hospital around 5 am.” The event organisers said it was tragic to “have lost such a young woman who had so much potential”. Stha Makhoba of Sthandiwe Projects, under whom the hostesses were subcontracted, told The Witness on Monday that they were contracted to work at the event until 10 pm on Saturday. “When we completed our shift, some of the ladies stayed behind and the others went back to the hostel with me.” Makhoba said the remaining group were to be transported to the hostel after the event. “I told them to alert the driver of the shuttle once they were ready to go but they had difficulties reaching him on his cell phone due to poor network coverage in the area.” After the event, the more than 10 women decided to walk to the hostel. One their way, they were harassed by a group of unknown men. Ndlovu was allegedly stabbed after she stood up to one of the men who inappropriately touched one of the women during a confrontation. “She was stabbed after telling the men to leave them alone. One of the men punched Sne in the face and just started stabbing her.” Ndlovu was rushed to hospital where she later died. An emotional Makhoba said Ndlovu died as a result of excessive loss of blood. UKZN ‘shocked and saddened’ In a statement on Monday, the University of KwaZulu-Natal
(UKZN) said it was shocked and saddened by the untimely death of Ndlovu. “We extend our sincere condolences to the family and friends
of Sinethemba Ndlovu and wish them strength through this difficult time. “Gender-based violence and any other form of violence has no
place in our society. The entire nation is at one in its revulsion of violence
against women, and especially the brutal murder of our youth,” said UKZN. 