Quick action by the Pietermaritzburg K9 Unit saw them outsmart and arrest five men allegedly linked to a murder and hijacking in Soweto, early yesterday morning. The team had received information from a car tracking company that a taxi that was hijacked in Soweto was heading toward Durban at around 2.30 am yesterday. The driver of the white Toyota Quantum was shot dead by the attackers before they fled in his vehicle. It is believed the gun used in the shooting was hired and had already been returned by the time the men were driving to Durban. It is alleged that they were going to drop the taxi with a buyer in Durban when they caught wind that they were being traced. The Pietermaritzburg K9 unit found the Quantum abandoned along the M13 but noticed a silver Etios, the getaway car, that had been travelling in convoy with the hijacked car. More information came through that the Etios had travelled all the way to Warwick Junction in Durban before turning around back onto the N3, driving toward Johannesburg. It is believed that one of the five men worked for a tracking company and that the men made several U-turns on the N3 between Durban and Johannesburg in an attempt to evade detection. However, as they made their way towards Johannesburg from Durban, the K9 unit spotted them and a high-speed chase ensued. The men tried to abandon the Etios at the roadside near the Ashburton off-ramp but the unit were quick in making their arrests. The K9 Unit were joined by other police members during the chase. One of the men tried to escape during the arrests and ran across the N3 and was tackled one of the K9 Unit dogs and immediately re-arrested. Police also found tools used to remove car units in the Etios. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Thulani Zwane said the five men are expected to appear in court soon. The news of the Pietermaritzburg K9 Unit’s success quickly reached community WhatsApp groups where Pietermaritzburg residents praised and thanked the unit for their “fantastic work”. “Good work to Police K9 and the tracking crews for arresting those suspects on the N3,” said one community member.