Every day in Pietermaritzburg, at least one woman is raped, according to crime statistics released on Thursday. Pietermaritzburg and surrounding areas have shown an increase in sexual assault and rape cases with the province showing a general increase in various sexual offences. Prestbury police station had 10 cases of rape this year while they only reported three cases for the 2017/2018 period. Plessislaer, Alexandra, Mountain Rise and Pietermaritzburg police stations all had over 40 cases of rape reported for the 2018/2019 period with Plessislaer reporting 179 cases, the highest in Pietermaritzburg. Mountain Rise had the second highest number of rape cases in the city with 115 reported this year. There was no increase from the number of cases for the 2017/2018 period, however, the number remains high. Following Plessislaer and Mountain Rise is Alexandra station with 74 rape cases. Pietermaritzburg station had 49 rape cases reported for the 2018/2019 period and Howick had 25 cases, a slight decrease from the 27 reported cases last year. Townhill reported four rapes from only one case last year and Hilton reported six cases for 2018/2019. Sexual assault cases were not as high as rape cases but mostly increased at Pietermaritzburg police stations except for Prestbury, which had zero cases, and Townhill which went down to one case from three cases last year. Hilton, Howick, Alexandra and Plessislaer police stations all reported an increase. The Witness recently reported on a 22-year-old woman who was held hostage in the city for two weeks and was raped repeatedly until she eventually managed to escape. This follows many other recent stories of women being brutally beaten, raped, sexually assaulted and murdered in the city. Meanwhile, various Pietermaritzburg religious leaders have organised a march for tomorrow at the Pietermaritzburg City Hall in protest against violence against women. The organisers said the protest, from 10 am to 11 am, is the public’s way of saying “enough is enough” and people will be carrying placards and posters with the aim to bring awareness to what religious leader Mohamed Saeed has called a “pandemic”.