A couple were found dead in their room at a house in Wicken Way in Winterskloof, Hilton, on Sunday night. It is believed they may have died as a result of a leak in the generator at the home. The woman, a domestic worker, and her boyfriend — whose names have not yet been released by police — were thought to be sleeping peacefully on Sunday evening when the home owner realised the two were dead. Emergency services and police sources have called the scene “strange” as there were no wounds on either of the bodies when they were found. A police source who could not be named said it was suspected the couple died due to a leak in the generator but the matter was still being investigated. Another police source also said the couple died allegedly due to a suspected leaky generator. It is unclear whether the generator is gas-, petrol- or diesel-run. A city generator technician who asked not to be named for professional reasons said that all generators could be dangerous if they were not stored properly but that gas generators are the most dangerous. “A gas generator is the biggest danger to people because it doesn’t have a strong smell and it is silent. People can die from inhaling the fumes of a diesel or petrol generator but one would have to inhale a lot of it, and the smell is strong so it is easily picked up. “Even if you are sleeping, the fumes from the petrol and diesel will wake you up.” He said the best thing to do is to store generators outside. “Some people do put their generators in the garage but they run an exhaust pipe out of the room to get rid of the fumes and ensure the room is very well ventilated.” Another generator technician from Pietermaritzburg said that people need to check their gas generators every two months or so to make sure they were not leaking. He also advised storing the generators outside or in a very well ventilated room. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said an inquest docket had been opened into the two deaths. The home owners declined to comment saying they were still trying to process everything.