 The Plessislaer area is one of the crime capitals
of KwaZulu-Natal, and ranks among the worst in the country for murder, rape and
assault crimes. The policing precinct, which encompasses 19 wards,
has seen its violent crime rates soar from last year, and is fourth worst in
the country for house robberies with 1 219 cases in the last year alone — a
rate of some 23 per week. The 166 murders in the area last year were by far
the most in the last 10 years, the crime statistics have shown. Minister of Police Bheki Cele on Thursday released
the latest crime statistics for the period April last year to March this year. Cele announced that nationally there were 21 022
murders in the latest stats — 686 more than the previous year and an increase
of 3,4%. Sexual offences increased by 4,6% to 52 420
offences — 2 312 more than the year before. The stats showed that the province was still
struggling with high murder rates, with just under 4 400 cases reported. KZN saw a staggering 7 667 cases of rape reported,
400 more than the previous period. There were 9 308 cases of sexual assault reported. Cele in April this year met with residents in
Caluza and said the police manpower in the area was severely lacking. He had
also noted that police were inundated with complaints of incompetence at some
stations in the city. The Witness also
revealed previously that Plessislaer was rock bottom in the entire country in
terms of the number of rape kits it needed. The crime statistics paint a grim picture of the
Plessislaer policing precinct, which has in previous years battled with low
staff numbers and inadequate resources to service its large area. The Plessislaer policing precinct reported: “The problem is that the manpower for Plessislaer
is not enough,” said Sifiso Mavundla, the Plessislaer CPF chairperson. “That’s
the main issue.” Mavundla said the lack of manpower meant satellite
stations in Imbali and Sweetwaters — for which the CPF had lobbied for years —
were generally understaffed.  He said, however, that a task team to deal with
crime in the area was deployed in July, and the area has seen a drop in some
crimes, like robbery, since. “But murder, rape and hijacking is still a problem.
And what will happen when the task team leaves?” Mavundla said problem areas were Imbali and
Esigodini, which saw political killings and taxi violence. He believed other
contributors to the murder rate was regular criminality. “It’s very bad, but we’re trying to make things
better,” he said. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese
declined to comment, saying that the statistics were being dealt with at the
ministerial level. He said he had not yet seen the stats when speaking
to The Witness on Thursday afternoon. 