Two men appeared briefly in the Pietermaritzburg magistrate’s court on Monday charged with the murder of a local candidate attorney. University of KwaZulu-Natal student Kwanda Ncala (22) stood in the dock along with his 17-year-old accomplice, who can’t be named because he is under the age of 18. They are charged with the murder of Mluleki Msomi (24), robbery and for being in possession of an unlawful firearm and ammunition. Read: Six held for lawyer’s murder The 17-year-old said a few things in court which magistrate M. Boikhutso ordered can’t be reported on because he was supposed to have appeared in a juvenile court and not in open court. He was also unrepresented. The court only came to know his age when he was asked during his appearance. Prosecutor Mariam Aboobaker remanded Ncala in custody until next week and transferred the 17-year-old to the juvenile court so that he could be remanded in the police cells until next week. Initially, six people were arrested for the murder. However, four were released. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said it was because investigations are still ongoing. They were arrested by the K9 Unit. Msomi worked at Austen Smith Attorneys in the city. Weekend Witness reported on Saturday that Msomi had been inside the pub, Saki, at Victoria Centre, chatting with some work colleagues when a black Hyundai parked outside the pub. Apparently, the car moved closer to the entrance of the pub and two men climbed out and entered Saki. One of the men was allegedly seen shaking Msomi’s friend’s hand and was later seen smoking and chatting outside to some of the people Msomi was with. It is believed Msomi left the pub just after 1 am and started walking to his car. The man who had been seen smoking was then seen running to the Hyundai, fetching something from the car and then running towards Msomi’s car before Msomi had reached his vehicle, a white Hilux double cab. Msomi was shot once in the head and his car was stolen. It was subsequently found dumped near UKZN. The suspects were arrested in the vicinity. The two men will appear in court next Monday.