A heartbroken woman whose dog was mauled to death by neighbouring pitbulls is demanding action against their owners. Copesville resident Farahana Jacobs and her family were devastated after their cross-breed fur baby “Meisie” was attacked by a neighbour’s three pitbulls early on Sunday morning. Meisie died after sustaining extensive bite wounds. According to a veterinarian’s report, the 12-year-old ridgeback cross boerboel dog sustained extensive bite wounds to the head and neck with severe damage to muscles of the neck. The pitbulls’ owner, Shaun Joseph, said he accepted responsibility for the incident. Joseph said gardening work at his house at the weekend had made the ground soft near their fence and the dogs had dug a hole under the fence and escaped. “It was beyond my control. I did my best to keep the dogs in my yard,” he said. He said he had given the family money to transport the injured dog to the vet and made arrangements to pay for the veterinarian’s bill. Joseph said his dogs were friendly and had never attacked anyone before. Recalling the attack, Jacobs told The Witness on Tuesday that the pitbulls got into her property at about 3 am on Sunday and attacked Meisie, who had been asleep outside the front door. “We heard dogs barking and we thought someone was in our yard. Moments later Meisie started howling and crying,” she said. When they opened the door to check what was happening, they saw the three pitbulls mauling their dog, she said. “We were scared that they would attack us too and we couldn’t go out immediately to try and save her. My son had to use a bush knife to hit the dogs and I jumped to pick her up and wrestled the dogs off,” Jacobs said. She said at first the dogs did not flinch, but they eventually ran off into the nearest bush. Jacobs continued: “At that point we were able to just pick her [Meisie] up and bring her inside. She was so badly injured her neck and head were open. There were pieces of flesh all over.” She alleged that when her son reported the attack to Joseph, he was not “bothered” and refused to help. “We had to wait until 10 am to go to the veterinary clinic. I tried to give her rescue drops to keep her calm, but she refused to open her mouth.” “When we arrived at the vet, we had to pay a R2 000 deposit otherwise they couldn’t help Meisie. The vet operated on her, but the injuries were too severe … she didn’t pull through,” said an emotional Jacobs. “We are all very traumatised. She was not just a dog … she was a member of this family,” she said. “We adopted her when she was still a puppy. We expected her to die of old age, not like this.” Jacobs said she wanted Joseph to be held liable for negligence. “Tomorrow, these dogs will attack somebody’s child. People shouldn’t be allowed to keep vicious dogs if they can’t control them. There must be serious consequences.” She said while she tried to report the matter at Mountain Rise police station, she was fobbed off by police. “The police officers on duty asked me what they should do. They said they can’t charge the dogs.”  Shaun Joseph with his pet pitbulls at his home in Copesville on Tuesday. The Witness sent queries to the police at Mountain Rise and the provincial media centre asking what the procedure is when people want to open cases relating to dog attacks. No response was received by late on Tuesday.  