“Black tax” is an emotional and financial burden. That is one finding in the research done by UKZN honours
student Nokubonga Komako, who suggests that Black people are born into black
tax. Komako’s dissertation examined the phenomenon of “black tax”
and whether it is a responsibility or a burden. Black tax is a term which generally refers to the extended
family’s financial obligations placed on black professionals. The 27-year-old Media and Cultural Studies graduate told
Weekend Witness that people are suffocated by the pressure to survive, look
after their families and live their best lives. She said her interest in this topic stemmed from personal
experience. “I had to leave varsity after my first degree. As much I
wanted to fulfil my studies, I had to go and work to help out at home. I wanted
to understand if I was being selfish for wanting to pursue my own dreams or is
it culturally expected of me,” she said. Komako carried out in-depth interviews with young
professionals from different backgrounds who said they felt compelled to
support their families as a way of showing ubuntu. “One of the interviewees’ said he was still dealing with
black tax at age 40. He told me he had to pause his business aspirations to
pursue a job before he went for his dream. What I gathered is as much as it is
a responsibility, there are cultural effects. “There is a responsibility of pulling others up when you
succeed. We are still very afraid as young people to speak up because we think
it is selfish. While others don’t mind paying black tax, the burden comes when
nobody else is willing to take over the responsibility.” Komako added that parents should stop comparing their
children’s success with others — just because their neighbour’s son manages to
send money home and extend the house, she said, doesn’t mean your children can
also afford to do so. She said black parents should be more understanding. “We have our own lives to live, we have dreams that we want
to achieve and if we are constantly worrying about them and the cousin that
needs to go to school, the little brother that needs new shoes then how are we
supposed to live our lives?” She said she has seen many people from different races who
have legacy issues and have responsibilities to their families back home and
pay their parent’s medical bills. “It is not a phenomenon that is unique to black people, it
may be heightened to black people simply because of financial legacy. But it is
something that is not unique to us,” she told Weekend Witness. Komako’s findings suggest that to break the cycle of black
tax, young people need to adopt a saving culture. “We are the generation that can take action in stopping this
cycle by starting to save. We also need to learn to say ‘no’ and develop a
habit of planning our finances to combat the cycle of poverty.”