A man who cut off the head of an 11-year-old boy claimed during his guilty plea in court on Tuesday that he did so because a policewoman had threatened to find and kill him whether he released the kidnapped boy or not. Mlungisi Zuma pleaded guilty in the Pietermaritzburg high court to the murder of Andile Fihla on November 9 last year. His advocate Xolani Sindane read out the plea, which was accepted by state advocate Pretty-Girl Ngcobo. Zuma said that his girlfriend, Samke­lisiwe Mbeje, used to work for the boy’s mother, Lindiswa Khuboni. In November, his girlfriend left him. “I suspected that the complainant [Khuboni] was directly involved in her leaving me,” he said. On November 7, he met Khuboni in Copesville while she was on her way to work and demanded to know his girlfriend’s whereabouts. When she said she knew nothing, he got angry and hit her several times with a stick. “I later discovered that the complainant sustained a broken arm among other injuries that I inflicted on her,” he said. Two days later he met Andile while he was on his way to school, and forced him to go home with him. Zuma said he wanted to persuade Andile to get his mother to meet with him. Zuma then contacted the boy’s mother to arrange a meeting, and she contacted the Mountain Rise police station to report that he had kidnapped her son. Zuma said that police tried to negotiate with him to release the boy. He spoke to a “Constable Makhathini” who not only insulted him but also swore at him. She said she was going to find and “kill” him, irrespective of whether the child was alive or not. He then decided to kill Andile, and slit his throat. “I thereafter separated the deceased’s head from his body and buried the head in Northdale while I concealed the deceased’s torso in Mason’s Mill in the Copesville area,” he said. Zuma said he handed himself over to the police after he realised that what he did was wrong, and showed them where he had hidden the boy’s head and body. Argument on sentencing takes place on Wednesday.