A Slangspruit mother and her seven-year-old son were killed on
Friday when a wall collapsed onto their bedroom, crushing them. They had been sleeping when the incident happened. The woman, who was identified as Nokubonga Mazibuko, and her
son Simelokuhle, were found lying on their bed with pieces of the rubble around
them after the boundary wall collapsed. The two had been renting a single unit in the six-bedroom
house structure built with rocks and mud. When Weekend Witness arrived at the scene, neighbours
watched in horror and others wept bitterly as the bodies were pulled out of the
rubble and loaded into a mortuary van. A relative, who arrived at the scene moments before the
bodies were taken out, was inconsolable after she was informed by police
officers that the two had died. Thembinkosi Nzimande, who lives in the same house, said the
incident happened at around 2 am. “I heard a loud sound and saw the wall tumbling down. I ran
out of the house to try and get help,” Nzimande said. He said after the wall collapsed, he walked to the
landlord’s house a few metres away to tell him what had happened. “We rushed back, and I didn’t expect to find the bodies
buried under the rubble. I have never seen anything like it in my life,” said
Nzimande. Mazibuko, originally from Nkandla in northern KwaZulu-Natal,
worked as a hairdresser at a salon on Church Street. Simelokuhle had been doing Grade 1 at Slangspruit Primary
School. Thamsanqa Msomi, the principal of Slangspruit Primary
School, extended his condolences to Simelokuhle’s family. He said they were
heartbroken by the horrific accident. Angry neighbours who gathered at the scene said that the
house had been unstable following heavy rains last weekend. They said they felt abandoned by the municipality and had
for years been promised proper housing. “Its not the first time something like this has happened. In
2015, a woman was killed after a house collapsed in this area. “The ward councillor came here and made promises but nothing
has happened. How many people must die before we get proper houses?” asked an
emotional Nelisiwe Khanyile. The residents said they were afraid that their houses would
also collapse and that they would be killed. About 95% of the mud homes in the
area are in a dilapidated state. Another neighbour, Ntombi Ngubane, described Mazibuko as a
hard-working, kind, giving and strong-willed person. “When I heard they had died, I couldn’t handle it. Both
their lives were cut very short. It’s heartbreaking,” said Ngubane. Get your home
inspected After torrential rains triggered mudslides that crushed
homes in the province, Shane Naidoo, Msunduzi chief building inspector, said it
was essential for homeowners to get their properties inspected by professionals
who could provide a comprehensive list of all the home’s underlying flaws. “Damp walls are often chalky, mouldy, or show bubbling or
flaking paint close to the source of the problem — usually within one metre of
the floor or up at ceiling level,” he said. Naidoo said most low-cost houses collapsed because they were
not built by professionals. “Due processes are not followed and often, the material used
does not meet the right requirements,” he said.