MK military veterans have warned the recently installed Msunduzi Municipality administrator, Sibusiso Sithole, that he will face rolling mass action should he fail to include them in the council’s programmes. Regional secretary for the Mkhonto Wesizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) in the Moses Mabhida regon, Menzi Mkhize, said MKMVA members — whom he claims have been promised jobs and other opportunities, were getting impatient. “Since 2015 there has been a number of promises that were made by both the ANC and the municipality’s leadership but nothing has been delivered. “We were given documents showing that there were housing stands that have been allocated to us by the municipality but we have not be shown the stands — our members’ patience is running thin and as leadership we have reached a stage where we can’t control their anger anymore,” he said. MKMVA members, who accuse government of failing to attend to their basic needs, had been staging protests in Msunduzi and other municipalities within the Moses Mabhida region in recent months. The military veterans, who are demanding jobs, tenders and houses from the municipalities, last year hijacked some apartments at the Aloe Ridge social housing development in Westgate. Mkhize said the military veterans were being pushed by the government’s intransigency. “The Military Veterans Act makes it very clear that government has a responsibility to assist war veterans with things such as jobs and housing. We have not been given any reason why the government is failing to assist our members, some of whom are, as we speak, dying because of poor health and poverty,” Mkhize said. The MKMVA leadership in the Moses Mabhida region, Mkhize said, had over the years been discouraging members who wanted to embark on protests against government entities such as Msunduzi. “All along we have been telling them that the government was working on a programme to assist them. “Government’s continued failure to assist them has created tensions between MKMVA members and us as the leadership. “Things have reached a point where they no longer trust us — they now accuse us of being captured,” he said. Threats by MKMVA members to destabilise the Msunduzi Municipality if their demands were not met follow those made by a group of disgruntled ANC members, also from the Moses Mabhida region, who last week threatened to shut down the municipality should the ANC leadership fail to include certain party members in the elections candidate list. The Msunduzi Municipality said Sithole was willing to meet the war veterans. “If the war vets have some issues they wanted to raise they should write a letter to request a meeting. “As we speak, I’m not sure whether they have officially requested such a meeting,” Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said. Sithole was appointed as administrator this month following the KZN cabinet’s decision to place the municipality under administration. The decision to place the municipality under administration was made after poor administration and corruption had affected the local government’s ability to deliver services.