Is modern life hampering young people’s ability, or even
desire, to get into relationships or have sex? Social media, easy access to pornography and young people
becoming more career-oriented, appear to have created a climate where they
either lack the desire to pursue a partner or have replaced human relationships
with online ones. International research suggests Millennials — those aged
between 22 and 37 — are having noticeably less sex than generations past, and
experts are still struggling to get to grips with social changes which are
emerging as a result of modern life. Since younger people today are essentially growing up using
technology to communicate with people, the chance to be social in their free
time is to an extent replaced with the computer screen. And this is all happening in arguably the most sexually free
period in history, where sex is seemingly no longer a taboo subject. Differences in gender identification and sexual preferences
are part of mainstream dialogue, magazines marketed to teenagers are swapping
cartoon characters for more mature articles on sex and dating. There are even apps for people to form relationships or have
casual sex. And while research on this front may be scarce in South
Africa, experts have agreed that the same phenomenon is seen to be growing
among young people in the country. “Just because there is more access to forming sexual
relationships and more tolerance for sexual and gender differences doesn’t mean
there’s more sex, interestingly enough,” said Dr Anthony Smith, the president
elect of the Southern African Sexual Health Association. “Many think there’s a hook-up culture happening, but that’s
just a percentage of the total number of young people. There have been big
societal changes which have occurred in the past 20 years or so, and that has
changed the way people relate to each other.” Smith said some contributing factors for this could be
social media and Internet use leading to the “devaluing” of face-to-face
relationships. “There is also a greater insecurity about jobs, so people
dedicate time to careers or studies and there’s a greater discouragement about
falling in love and forming relationships earlier. “There is also the rise of the use of porn and the rise of
young people relating [to each other] through technology, and this leads to
them giving real relationships less importance.” He added that constant social-media usage could lead to
anxiety. “It brings in the comparative issue of seeing other people ‘doing
better’. It just totally magnifies this in a way that my generation certainly
didn’t.” Culture expert Professor Jean-Philippe Wade echoed Smith.
“People project a certain self-image online and this can detach people from
real life. “Even if we look at porn, it detaches sex from emotion and
depicts a skewed representation of sex.” Wade said: “Most interactions for young people these days
are mediated online and people hop from one app to another. This certainly
affects people’s competence in real social circumstances. “The Internet offers near-endless distractions and there’s
only a finite amount of time in a day and it seems as if [young people are]
choosing to ‘live online’ instead.” Wade said there has somehow been a “claw back” from the
sexual liberation seen in the sixties. Social movements like #MeToo, where women describe their
unwanted sexual encounters and sometimes name the perpetrator, have likely
empowered women to respond to sexual advances in ways previous generations did
not. “Maybe they feel more independence in choosing for
themselves and not accepting bad sex or being coerced,” Smith said. He added that the breaking down of traditional gender roles
adds to the challenge of people relating to each other. “Lots of old
relationships were quite polarising in terms of male and female roles … [but
there was an] amount of certainty about what each person should do. “But now relationships have to be negotiated one step at a
time and that takes a lot of energy in itself.” The same principle
applies with porn A person seeing sexual videos or photos fires off the same
response in the brain, but has the exact same consequence. Soon, after consuming a lot of porn, there becomes a need to
seek out more unconventional or extreme types to satisfy the impulse. Soon enough, a normal human partner may not suffice. This is what’s known as Porn-Induced Erectile Dysfunction —
or PIED — where a young person, who should be in their sexual prime, is unable
to become aroused by a normal sexual experience. Once again, the ease and availability of porn makes it more
attractive than pursuing a real intimate relationship. Porn use is very popular in South Africa, with famous
website Pornhub ranking the country as the top porn-watching country in Africa. Consequences of
online relationships Psychologist Clive Willows says social media makes a person
detached, more self-centred and causes their bonds with people to be less
intimate. He told Weekend Witness that establishing relationships on
social media to a large extent negates the chance for a deep connection with a
person. “People on social media are much more careful about what
they disclose regarding themselves, and things like facial expressions and tone
of voice are not there. It is a less intimate relationship. “Also, people don’t get as emotionally involved and so people
find it easier to end relationships and move onto others.” Willows continued: “Relationships will be unstable and less
permanent, and people don’t have to work through issues. They will even break
up using an SMS so they don’t have to face the person.” He said this may be preferred by anxious people who are
afraid of getting hurt, but added that a proper face-to-face relationship had
long-term benefits. “In a relationship which is working well there are huge
benefits, but people who keep a distance to avoid being hurt don’t experience
the benefits.” He added that he is seeing more people with this kind of
behaviour in his practice. Why is social media
addictive? Social media’s ability to facilitate people’s desire to
build networks with other people has huge benefits for humanity, whether it
involves helping a person find their “tribe” online, helping create strong
bonds among people united in a cause, or for creating new business
opportunities. So how is it that such an important advancement can have
such a devastating effect when it comes to real human relationships? Apart from the enjoyment factor, the reason why it becomes
an addiction could be to do with the reward and motivation system in the brain. In its simplest form, when a person sees food or a potential
partner, the neurotransmitter dopamine is released and that motivates them to
go after that thing. When it comes to social media, “likes” and other
interactions cause dopamine to be released, which makes a person want to chase
that feeling again. The trouble is that because the “reward” in this case is
relatively easy to achieve, there can be a dopamine overload, and the receptors
then become dull. At this point, a person’s threshold to feel the pleasure is
heightened and will therefore need more “likes” or more followers or more
interactions to get the sense of reward. There is a school of thought that says attracting “likes” on
social media fulfils the “self-actualisation” human need on the hierarchy of
human needs popularised by U.S. psychologist Abraham Maslow. The hierarchy of needs was derived to understand human
motivations, so this would make being popular on social media as most important
to a person after food, security, relationships and self-esteem are met. The
brain usually favours the path of least resistance, and because the route to
achieving the reward is easier, going for “likes” on social media is favoured
over pursuing relationships with real people, which has complications. New social phenomena
changing the way we view sex and relationships The mostly-online movement Men Going Their Own Way (MGTOW)
is cautioning men about relationships with women. The movement’s philosophy lies in part with questioning
“double standards” regarding gender which seem to favour women, such as in
domestic disputes and divorce matters. Critics of the movement, however, believe that MGTOW is
preferred by those who are frustrated to the point where they have given up on
dating, and MGTOW offers them a home. Other examples of behaviour or lifestyle choices that are
not considered “traditional” include: * Herbivore men — Herbivore men, or grass-eater men, is a
term which originated in Japan to describe men who have no interest in romantic
relationships. By the same token, another phenomenon in Japan, called
parasite singles, is when women live with their parents beyond well into
adulthood to enjoy a more carefree and comfortable life, avoiding some of
responsibilities associated with the adult world. * Sex dolls — There has been a rise of sex dolls over the
past few years, with the dolls having become sophisticated to the point where
the latex casing on them feeling like real flesh. These dolls sometimes even have robotic parts to simulate
the experience more realistically. So, what do we do about it? Dr Anthony Smith, of the Southern African Sexual Health
Association, said it was important to not simply condemn the younger
generations merely because their actions were different to previous ones. “Society may change as a whole and the impact of a lack of
face-to-face relationships may change depending on that.” He goes on to add: “Eventually a person will want to have an
intimate relationship with someone, but the concern is that they won’t be well
equipped to make that happen. “We may find completely new problems emerging because
previous generations weren’t like this and we would have to learn from scratch
how to deal with them.” Smith said helping someone who isn’t socially competent
enough to get into a relationship begins with taking an audit of their life. “We would need to make a diagnosis first; what is the nature
of the problem? Is there a mental problem or are their social skills just like
a muscle that is weak? “From then on it really is just about exposure and going out
into the world and escaping their comfort zone.” The benefits of a
healthy sex life Sex is a central part of emotional and physical health.
Regular sex helps increase intimacy and the ability to express your feelings
toward your partner. Physically it is also good for your health by reducing
stress and making you feel good about yourself. Having sex is also known to make people happy, and at an
emotionally unsettling time in life, regular sex with your partner can ease
anxiety and even depression. Sexual activity can increase your levels of oxytocin, which
has been shown to decrease anxiety and stress levels. This can also have an
effect on how the blood vessels respond to stress, and decrease blood pressure
and stroke risks caused by high blood pressure. Sex has also been shown to release endorphins, which act as
natural painkillers. Being sexually satisfied has also been linked to enjoying a
better quality of life. Sex with your partner can lead to better communication
within the relationship, strengthening your bond and increasing overall
intimacy.