The provincial government has taken control of the running of Msunduzi Municipality for the second time in nine years, citing a dysfunctional council, poor management, billing problems and absenteeism of councillors. On Tuesday the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), Nomusa Dube-Ncube, placed the “ineffective” City under Section 139 (b) of the Constitution with immediate effect. “It has become clear to the provincial government that Msunduzi Municipality is no longer able, alone, to guarantee the provision of sustainable services to communities without an intervention from the national and provincial government,” she said. This means that the functions related to the municipality’s administration, appointment of managers, financial management and service delivery would be done with the hands-on support of the provincial government. Dube-Ncube said the intervention was due to the inability by Msunduzi to hold its councillors accountable for deliberately absenting themselves from critical meetings and thus collapsing the quorum and rendering the council dysfunctional. “This municipality has also failed to institute consequence management measures for managers responsible for unauthorised and irregular expenditure.” Council has likewise failed to exercise oversight over management, with particular reference to the management of conditional grants resulting in under-expenditure, stopping or threatening the stopping of funds by National Treasury. This, and the billing issue, compromised the financial position of the municipality. “The Msunduzi council has additionally failed to implement consequence management measures against persons responsible for failing to maintain proper records, resulting, for instance, in the municipality’s non-disclosure of pension and medical aid deductions,” said Dube-Ncube.  The Witness announcing the last time Msunduzi was put under administration in March 2010. She said council also failed to resolve innumerable service delivery-related challenges besetting the city, particularly waste, roads maintenance and electricity. “The crime and grime that we’ve seen here, the type of filth and dirtiness of this city, really is an embarrassment to say the least. “To think that you have senior managers — who are paid very nicely to be managers — but who seem to be either failing or not willing or lack something to manage what they are supposed to manage.” Administration to be appointed for City The City’s leadership also did not investigate allegations of malfeasance and maladministration against senior managers and other leaders of the municipality. Dube-Ncube said in cases where senior managers were probed, council still did not implement the recommendations. An administrator will be appointed to oversee the functioning of the municipality and implement Cogta’s turnaround strategy. This includes acting as chairperson of the interim finance committee to monitor and manage the cash flow, oversee purchase requisitions and to ensure that the municipality is not overdrawn. Dube-Ncube said a ministerial representative together with Cogta’s team will ensure implementation of financial systems, deal with issues of governance, service delivery and human resources. They will also implement remedial action plans dealing with the negative audit — including consequence management against officials found to have caused unauthorised and irregular expenditure. While Msunduzi might be still able meet its short-term financial obligations, she said the billing issues had compromised the City’s financial stability. As a result the municipality had a cash coverage of just over one month. In March the City was able to meet its monthly collection target of R400 million, however, it is still owed an estimated total of R3 billion by consumers — including government departments who fail to pay for water and electricity. “We are in a process of addressing the challenges of billing,” Dube-Ncube said. 