The City’s executive committee has approved sponsorship of R1,65 million for the Comrades Marathon for three years. Acting municipal manager Neli Ngcobo said every year Msunduzi works in partnership with the Comrades Marathon Association (CMA) in ensuring that the annual race, between Durban and Pietermaritzburg, is a success. Msunduzi intends to pay R550 000 of the sponsorship amount to the CMA by January of each year and also provide operational support — including ensuring the electricity supply and infrastructure at either the start or finish of the race. According to the report she tabled at a recent meeting, the City’s R50 000 contribution for the Greater Edendale Race will be included in the total sponsorship amount for CMA to promote, host and stage this local event. Ngcobo said the Comrades race had a huge economic benefit for the city as thousands of athletes and their families stay in Pietermaritzburg either on the eve or the day of the marathon. The economic injection for the 2018 race was estimated to be R700 million. “As the host city, we stand to gain not only economically but also branding opportunities through leveraging the Comrades brand, exposures in various local and international mediums,” read the document. On the partnership agreement — that Ngcobo and the CMA will sign before the release of the funds — Msunduzi will be able to put up its branding within Pietermaritzburg during the up-run and anywhere between the city and Cato Ridge for the down-run. The municipality is entitled to brand up to a distance of at least 300 metres each way. The City will also get a free stand at the Comrades expo, where it will be permitted to have Msunduzi’s promotional material. While the CMA will be managing the publicity for the marathon, Msunduzi will make available a billboard at the entrance of the city which shall bear dual branding and the words: “Msunduzi Municipality — Home of the Comrades Marathon.” The City also expressed commitment to operational preparation activities, which shall include grass cutting, repairing potholes, manhole covers, fixing street lights and removal of litter.