A Mooi River woman is recovering in hospital from multiple stab wounds after she was attacked by a man believed to be an ex-boyfriend who thereafter threw himself in front of an Intercity Express bus on the N3 at the weekend. The stabbing followed by the apparent suicide happened on Sunday morning. Informed sources told The Witness that after being stabbed 11 times, the victim, Thandeka Ndlovu, had managed to crawl from her home to a nearby clinic for help. The 31-year-old mother was at home in Bruntville on Saturday night when a man knocked on her door, pretending to be her brother. When she opened the door a man she’d reportedly broken up with attacked and stabbed her multiple times leaving her for dead. The assailant then ran to the N3 and threw himself in front of a bus full of passengers. He was declared dead at the scene. Police said on Monday that they could not release his name as it was possible that some members of his family were not yet aware of his death. Horrified Intercity Express bus driver Hlalele Shobana told The Witness on Monday that he was still traumatised as a result of the incident, which happened at around 12.30 am on Sunday. Shobana said he was driving a bus full of passengers en route from Durban to Johannesburg at the time. Shortly before he reached the Mooi River toll plaza on the N3, a man suddenly appeared and ran in front of the bus. Shobana said he was travelling at a speed of around 100 km per hour. “I saw a figure running onto the freeway. I was shocked and confused and tried to apply the brakes as fast as I could but it was already too late. The bus hit him hard,” said Shobana. He said most of the passengers were fast asleep when the incident happened and did not even realise what had just occurred. Shobana said he has taken a few days off from work following the incident as he said he is still “shaken” by the ordeal. St Michaels Ambulance director Ryan King said on Monday that their crew were called out to Bruntville Clinic to fetch Ndlovu. “From what she told us, it sounded like she managed to get to the clinic from her house on her own. “She was very very lucky. It [the weapon] seemed to have missed all of her major organs and arteries but the wounds were quite wide and needed stitches. She was in a better state than we imagined.” Ndlovu was rushed to St Anne’s Hospital where she still remains. Her family on Monday declined to comment on her present condition or the incident through the hospital management. Provincial police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said charges of attempted murder are being investigated by police at Mooi River in connection with the incident. She added that a case of culpable homicide has also been opened in connection with the subsequent bus accident on the of the N3.