I think I’ve told you our newsroom joke. Every time I leave
the office, the best stories break. It always happens.  I
miss out on all the excitement and buzz and come back to work thoroughly
fed-up. Last weekend we headed for the hills for an extended long
weekend. And as usual, that’s when it all happened — the “intervention” as they
call it, at Msunduzi. Many of you will know how much I’ve wanted to see
meaningful change at City Hall. I’ve written about it often enough. I’ve shown
you the best of my ranting, and some of the worst. And let’s be clear, I’m not talking a change in political
parties. My particular passion for it harkens back to the days when I covered
council as a reporter and saw what could be achieved under a dedicated ANC
mayor and municipal manager who cared enough to work together to sort the city
out and keep it that way. While I blame all the councillors and officials who allowed
the current rot to spread on their watch, I lay ultimate blame on our MEC for
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Nomusa Dube-Ncube was aware of
the state of affairs in our beloved city, which has taken years to sink to
these levels. When we and others begged her to take action, we were mostly
told there are investigations, probes and meetings under way, all very
secretive and sensitive. Which of them actually took decisive action? Which
resulted in dismissals for jobs not done? Which held people accountable? She’s proven that she’s deft at delay tactics and denials.
She played us all this way and that. She herself watched this farce unfold, but
it seems there are none so blind as they who will not see. Why did she look away? Why did she make countless excuses
for the nonsense going on? Why did she let us slide into a state of dismal
dysfunction? Why did she ignore the pleas of all of us from across the
political spectrum, including the ANC, asking that something be done to fix the
rot? Now, mere weeks before elections and with the city way past
the brink of functionality, she swoops in like a superhero with a cape, to
“intervene”. Must we applaud? Should we be grateful? Would she like to
see glittering commentaries and sterling praise pieces written about how happy
we are? That’s not going to happen. We who love our Pietermaritzburg are not
stupid. We recognise her as a traitor to the city itself  and to every last person who pays for rates
and services here. But having made her sweeping new promises, she must now
deliver. How will she turn things around when they are so completely broken? To use another proverb, a stitch in time, MEC, saves nine.
You could have saved the City and its ratepayers millions of rands, if not
billions, by stepping in when things started to go south. It’s not like you were
unaware of the general degradation. We wrote about it. We spoke about it. We
told you. But you let it happen. On your watch. So I now present a suggestion for Zweli Mkhize, the minister
of Cogta in our national government. This is what I want to say to him: Let’s
also not pretend you didn’t know how bad things were — you live here! I’ve
written that before. But to help sort things out in KZN once and for all, it’s
time you put our provincial Cogta under administration. Let someone who
genuinely cares for the people of this province take charge, and let them show
the department how to fulfil its role, which is essentially to look after the
local municipalities on its turf. How’s this for motivation: we have had a slew of KZN
municipalities show they are unable to cope with the challenges of running
their towns. There’s Mpofana, Richmond, Nkosi Langalibalele, Abaqulusi,
Mtubatuba, Endumeni and now Msunduzi. Surely that’s evidence enough that they are not getting the
oversight or support they need to keep functioning properly. Who’s to blame?
Who is mentoring and guiding them? What remains to be seen now, is how those who have committed
the “malfeasance” at Msunduzi and Cogta will be dealt with. According to an online source, this fashionable buzzword is
defined as intentional conduct that is wrongful or unlawful, especially by
officials or public employees. Dube-Ncube insists in her speech about the
“intervention” — a sweet and gentle word — that Cogta does not want to “point
fingers and penalise, because we love and respect our capital city”. But if she won’t reprimand or punish people, how will we
achieve accountability? Maybe that’s the problem. Cogta too is afraid of
accountability. Come on MEC. Please have the guts to finally lay down the law,
and mean it. Get errant officials and councillors booted out and  work for the residents instead of the
factions. Or vacate your post and let someone else do it. We’re tired of
promises. And Minister Mkhize, if she won’t do that, it will be up to
you to hold her and her department to account. Are you up for that? Is proper
accountability a thing you subscribe to? Let’s see. 