With three sightings of crocodiles in the Duzi River and many others at Albert Falls Dam, officials have warned locals to be vigilant; and not to catch the crocs themselves. The Duzi-uMngeni Conservation Trust (Duct) said they had seen their first crocodile in the build-up to the Dusi Canoe Marathon. The second sighting was just after the marathon and the Duct team immediately called Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, who came out and set up a trap. While the trap remains empty, the Duct team spotted their third crocodile on Friday afternoon near the YMCA above the Boshoff Street bridge. According to the team, the crocodile appeared to be between one and one-and-a-half metres long. While unsure where the crocodiles have come from, a source urged people to be aware of their surroundings while paddling or fishing and to report crocodile sightings to Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife. Meanwhile, Epworth School had to cancel all their water activities at the Albert Falls Dam earlier this year for their annual Mudman event. Epworth School’s spokesperson Vicky Crookes said there were no water activities because of the reports of crocodiles. “We had to change our format to exclude anything associated with the dam. As a result, we had a run, cycle, run event and left out the swimming and canoeing stages,” said Crookes. “Our Mudskippers did not even participate in the traditional ‘wade’ on the water’s edge.” She said numerous signs were erected along the entire water’s edge stating: “the Epworth Mudman Committee, in consultation with Msinsi Holdings have determined that prior to, including and following this event, the use of the dam for swimming or paddling is forbidden”. She said the Epworth Mudman Committee has not yet made a decision about a venue for next year. Msinsi Holdings, which runs the Albert Falls resort, said swimming has never been allowed at the dam. “Msinsi is engaging with experts to ensure that these reptiles are removed from the dam and further advise the visitors at the dam to leave the water should they sight these reptiles,” said Nazley Mullah of Msinsi. Mullah said it was difficult to confirm where the crocodiles had come from, but advised visitors to continue reporting crocodile sightings to the reception when they visit the dam. “Visitors are warned not to try and catch these reptiles on their own. Msinsi is closely monitoring the situation.”