The case of a Hilton man charged with having assaulted two teenagers was on Tuesday struck off the Pietermaritzburg district court roll. This comes in the wake of withdrawal statements made by Mduduzi Mdunge and Simphiwe Mdletshe at the Hilton police station. The two had charged Paul Anthony Dickinson with assaulting them with intent to do grievous bodily harm in the early hours of June 4 last year, while they were walking home from work. Read: Teens want justice Their withdrawal statements were almost identical, except for one sentence that was not worded the same. Both said they “hereby wish to withdraw the case of assault GBH which I opened at the Hilton SAPS”. Simphiwe said “the accused has financially compensated me”, while Mduduzi said “I have been financially compensated by the accused”. They both said they “no longer desire police investigation” in this matter and consider the matter over. “That is all I wish to state concerning this matter,” they both said. Paul’s father, Ian Dickinson, said the case had been “blown out of proportion”. “It was never racial,” he added. Also read: Attack ‘wasn’t racial’ He said that on the night of the incident, there were several burglaries in Hilton. His son had been house-sitting that night and when he arrived at the house he found it ransacked. “Over R100 000 worth of goods were stolen and the house was turned upside down,” he said. Dickinson senior said that his son then contacted a security company. Two men were brought who were believed to be responsible for the house robbery. He claimed the two “had already been assaulted”. “Paul was naughty and slapped one of them with an open hand. My brother and other son moved him away quickly and calmed him down,” he said. Dickinson senior denied earlier reports that the assault victims were left at the roadside injured. He said an ambulance was contacted and had arrived. The Witness quoted the teens as having said after the incident that they were walking home from work when a group of white men hurled racial slurs at them, assaulted them and left them at the roadside to die. Mdletshe confirmed on Tuesday that he, Dickinson and Mduduzi have resolved their issues.