Counter charges of assault have been laid by two young men
who appeared in court last week in connection with a brawl that erupted outside
Pot and Barrel pub in Hilton. The two men  — Marcus
William Daniel Reeves (23) and Chad Derrick Potgieter (20) — made a fleeting
appearance in the magistrate’s court charged with assault with intent to do
grievous bodily harm. The charge sheet alleges they assaulted Luke Adam on
February 9 by hitting him with their elbows, and punching him. They are on R1 000 bail each and are due back in court later
this month. But Potgieter and Reeves are fighting back and this week
laid counter assault charges against Adam, a 16-year-old alleged to be his
girlfriend, as well as her brother. The case is for alleged assault and two charges of crimen
injuria against the trio arising from alleged verbal abuse. Speaking to Weekend Witness on Friday, Potgieter’s father,
Dave, said there were two sides to the story. He confirmed that his son and Reeves had opened their own
case against Adam and his companions. It is being alleged in that case that Potgieter and Reeves
were sworn at and called “names” and accused of having bullied the teenage
girl’s brother. They were also allegedly subjected to a physical assault. They dispute being the initial aggressors. Dave said his son had sustained deep scratches to his face. The state alleged in the case against the two men that
Adam’s nose was broken as result of the altercation and that he had received 30
stitches. Dave also questioned on Friday why a 16-year-old girl had
been allowed in to the Pot and Barrel. Travis Grubb, a manager of the Pot and Barrel, told Weekend
Witness in reponse to a query on Friday that the pub bouncers always check
young people’s ID documents to ensure they are not under 18. However, he could
not say if the 16-year-old had been at the pub. When pressed he said Weekend
Witness should contact his “bosses” via email. Weekend Witness sent an email inquiry to the address
provided by him but received no response by late on Friday. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Thulani
Zwane confirmed that counter charges of 
common assault laid by Reeves and Potgieter are being investigated by
Hilton police in connection with the altercation in February. “Both dockets have been taken to the senior public
prosecutor for decision,” he said.