Police have warned of a rise in the number of smash and grabs at the Chota Motala Road off-ramp from the N3, as yet another resident has come forward to say he had fought off robbers. Israel Dorasamy was with his 13-year-old granddaughter when he was accosted by two men after his vehicle had broken down and he was parked at the side of the road. Dorasamy said that he had fetched his granddaughter from school and was travelling on the N3 near the Chota Motala off-ramp when he realised he had car trouble. “I pulled off on the side of the road and called my son-in-law because he works not far away from where I was parked. I got out of the car and was checking the engine while my granddaughter sat inside.” He then saw two men coming toward the car, and instinctively knew something might happen. “I moved towards the car to protect my granddaughter. The one guy asked me for R20 and said ‘I want it now for food’. I reached in my pocket and pulled out R50. He grabbed the money.” Dorasamy said the man then asked for his cellphone and began to fight with him, and he fought back. The other assailant ran off. His son-in-law then arrived on the scene, causing the fighting man to flee. “There are no cameras there, and at the time there were no cars. People were passing me while I was broken down telling me to be careful but I thought it would be okay waiting on the road,” the shaken man said. This incident came days after The Witness reported that a Howick woman was the victim of a smash and grab incident on the same road. Mountain Rise police, meanwhile, have cautioned the public to be vigilant after seeing a rise in the number of cases of smash and grabs at the N3 near Chota Motala and Willowton roads. “People who pounce on unsuspecting drivers have turned some pleasant rides into nightmares. “They smash the window or open an unlocked doors and grab whatever they regard as valuable,” the station said in a statement. Mountain Rise urged motorists to ensure doors were locked and windows were closed, saying thieves sought out handbags, cellphones and briefcases in stationary vehicles and those in slow-moving traffic. “Be wary of people standing at traffic lights or intersections. They may be innocent but perpetrators mix with these people while waiting for an opportunity to pounce. “They may even point to something being wrong with your vehicle to get you to open your window or get out of your vehicle.” Mountain Rise also advised motorists not to open windows for any stranger, and not to get out of the car to remove obstacles like rocks or tyres on the road. “Never leave any children alone in a vehicle, not even for a moment. Take them with you, wherever you go,” the station advised.