Three men and a woman who were allegedly caught on CCTV cameras assaulting a man, have been remanded in custody for seven days. Roxanne Naicker (30), her husband Karl Naicker (37) and two brothers Ryan (36) and Riley (28) Reddy are charged with the attempted murder of Yashveer Kesari (29). Read: Critical after assault State prosecutor Sally Singh told the court that at this stage the state is opposed to bail being granted. This is because of the seriousness of the crime. She also said that Kesari was in serious condition in hospital and the charge might change to murder if he dies. Advocate Mergen Chetty said his clients should be granted bail, especially Roxanne who has a three-month-old-baby. He said the child was distressed on Tuesday night and did not sleep. Chetty also said they all had fixed addresses and had handed themselves over to police. The magistrate said proper procedure had to be followed and granted the state its seven-day adjournment. Family members of the accused were livid that their loved ones were going to spend a week in jail. One said she did not expect Roxanne to be detained because she was breastfeeding. Another said that if the baby got sick, the family must sue for damages. The assault on Kesari, of Allandale, took place on March 24 at a spaza shop in the area. The Witness reported that the beating followed an incident where Kesari was allegedly involved in a physical fight with a man who he claimed had almost run him over. The newspaper is in possession of a series of CCTV videos that show four people entering the shop and attacking Kesari with various weapons until he passes out. In another video showing what happened before the small group assaulted him, Yashveer, who is a local gym instructor, is seen rolling on the ground and snatching a baton from a young man and chasing him with it before they part company and he enters the spaza shop. The man he was fighting with then uses his cellphone. The accused will appear again in court next Wednesday.