The Sharks’ Super Rugby victory over the Waratahs at the
weekend provided a big reason for the Durban franchise to smile, but there is
really no time for them to celebrate with another giant task ahead of them this
week. The Sharks kicked off their three-week Down Under tour with
a 23-15 win in Australia and now they move to Christchurch in New Zealand for
their “mission impossible” against the mean-looking Crusaders at AMI Stadium at
9.35 am this Friday. The victory for the Sharks provided a huge relief for coach
Robert du Preez who was heavily criticised by the franchise’s legend, Tony
Watson, last week. Watson, who reckons Du Preez is not the right man for the
job, said in an open letter the team had been in free fall for almost two seasons. The away win also took Du Preez’s charges to the top of the
very congested South African conference and second on the overall log with 26
points after 10 outings. Watson’s scathing comments came after the team lost two
back-to-back matches to the Jaguares and Reds at King’s Park and the fact the
team had lost four matches in a row at home, so Du Preez really needed
breathing space ahead of the menacing Crusaders. The Crusaders are not just the defending Super Rugby
champions, but they are the best team in the competition with nine titles to
their name. In this year’s campaign, the Kiwis have played a total of 10
matches with eight victories, one defeat and a draw. That superb run has allowed the Crusaders a chance to sit at
the summit of the overall standings comfortably with 39 points. Du Preez will be hoping that his players will again produce
a game with minimal errors — which has been the main problem in their recent
struggles — and be on their level best when it comes to execution, like they
did against the Waratahs in Sydney on Saturday. “The Waratahs are a really good team, we saw what happened
last week when they defeated the Rebels. They are very dangerous but our
intention was to get the upper hand upfront. “I think the boys were outstanding, I think the forwards
were magnificent too,” said Du Preez. “It was massive win for us. In the game against the Reds we
created a lot of opportunities, there were some try-scoring opportunities that
we didn’t take. “It’s been a story of our season, creating opportunities but
not converting them. And we let in two soft tries against the Reds but we had a
very good week in Sydney and the boys were very keen to come away with a win.” The coach has another tough call to make on whether he
continues with Curwin Bosch, who gave an outstanding performance at the
weekend, at flyhalf or he brings back his son, Robert du Preez junior. “Curwin played really well. We will see whether he starts
next game, we will take one game a time,” he said. Meanwhile, All Blacks prop Owen Franks will be out of action
for at least another four weeks as he recovers from a small tear in his
shoulder, the Crusaders said on Monday. The 31-year-old, however, is not expected to require surgery
and should be fit again for the tail end of the Super Rugby season. Franks, a cornerstone of the All Blacks scrum since he made
his debut in 2009, was injured in the Crusaders’ 36-14 victory over the ACT
Brumbies on April 6. In another development, the Sanzaar Foul Play Review
Committee have accepted a guilty plea from Waratahs lock Jed Holloway for
contravening Law 9.12 (A player must not physically abuse anyone) after he was
red carded against the Sharks in Parramatta on Saturday. Holloway has been suspended from all forms of the game for
three weeks, up to and including May 18. The incident occurred in the 45th minute of the match played
at Bankwest Stadium.  FIXTURES Friday Crusaders v Sharks — 9.35 am Reds v Sunwolves — 11.45 am Saturday Hurricanes v Rebels — 7.15 am Highlanders v Chiefs — 9.35 am Brumbies v Blues — 11.45 am Bulls v Waratahs — 3.05 pm Jaguares v Stormers — 9.45 pm