The senior ANC leadership has appealed to comrades in the Moses Mabhida region to stop killing each other. They were speaking during the dignitary-studded funeral for Slangspruit-born MK veteran and former Msunduzi councillor Muzi Mthiyane, which was held at the city hall on Sunday. Mthiyane (66) died last week after being ill for some time. “What’s happening in this region is despicable. We are tired of coming here all the time to bury our comrades that you keep killing,” said ANC MPL Sipho Gcabashe. He said there was conflict among the ANC members because everyone wanted to be a leader, even those who did not have any capacity. Gcabashe said the level of service delivery had also regressed because wrong people were deployed to government. “As leaders we are not doing the work that we were elected to do, instead we are more concerned about stealing money and tenders. “But you as the public must also stop worshipping those in leadership positions because that goes into an ignorant person’s head and they start thinking they are above the ANC and forget what they were elected to do,” he said He said the ANC also made a mistake of protecting those who were doing wrong things instead of stripping them of their powers. He said the positions within the ANC did not belong to any individual or caucus. “There’s always been contestation within the ANC, but we didn’t fight. “After the conference we all supported the leadership that was elected. “No one was snubbed. What you are doing now is killing the ANC.” Gcabashe warned the regional task team saying it must get the local ANC in order because they will soon be called by the senior structures to answer for the lack of unity, discipline and accountability that has been gripping the region. Themba Mavundla, KwaZulu-Natal chairperson of the MK Veterans Association, said people must stop demanding to lead. He said this trend led to disputes and campaigns to remove veteran leaders from positions. “We need the experience of these older people you are campaigning to have removed. You say you want to lead, but will you be able to do the job expected?” Mavundla said seasoned leaders like Mthiyane knew that reconciliation came from discussing issues instead of rushing to pick up arms. Speaking to The Witness in the sidelines of the funeral, former KwaZulu-Natal premier Sbu Ndebele described Mthiyane as a peacemaker and social worker at heart. He said Mthiyane was very involved in the unification of the taxi industry and had started a rehabilitation programme for prison inmates from the taxi industry and as result there are people who were able to get skills training and degrees while in prison. “One of them actually has a master’s degree,” said Ndebele. As part of the programme the inmate is counselled to a level where he meets the family of the victim of the crime committed and apologises for what happened. Thereafter he undergoes training in sewing of school uniforms, which are then donated to school children from poor families.