Andile Bhengu (12), who is now in Grade 7, reckons he is a big boy now. The Witness has been documenting Andile’s first day of school every year since Grade R. The journey began in 2012 when he started his Grade R at Sombongangani Primary School and continued when he went to Langsyde Primary to start Grade 1. On Wednesday afternoon The Witness met up with Andile at school just before home time. “I’m grown now, people can’t see me waking up in the morning as if I’m still a child,” he laughed. Andile, who seemed more outspoken this year compared to previous years, said he was excited about his final year in primary school. “My final results last year were very good. I got two As, in English and IsiZulu,” he said. Andile said he was excited about going to high school next year and will be attending St John Paul 2 High School (formally known as Langsyde High). “I don’t think I’ve grown much in height since last year and I doubt I’ll be growing any taller soon, but I don’t mind because I won’t be the only short boy in Grade 8 next year,” he said. Andile said he spent most of his holidays swimming at Siyo’s, which is a B&B with a gym and swimming pool close to his home in Elandskop. “You pay R20 in the morning and you can swim all day,” he said. Going to the beach in Durban with his family was the highlight of Andile’s holidays. Last year, Andile was tasked with the “big brother” duty of taking care of his two younger cousins — Amahle (6) and Ntando Sosibo (6) — who were due to start Grade 1. This year, he had to keep a close eye on his older brother’s daughter, Nikiwe (5), who started big school yesterday. “Nikiwe wasn’t that nervous about school because I had told her all she needed to know during the holidays. I checked up on her during break-time and went to check up on her again during class. I just saw her running around now and she seems to have already made friends,” said “big brother Andile”. The youngster said he did not feel pressured about his first day of school being documented by The Witness every year. “I actually like it. My family, neighbours and some of my teachers are always excited to get the newspaper and read my articles,” he said.