The ANC top brass roadshow in KZN had a couple of hiccups as MK war veterans invaded the party’s Durban offices, while the party’s members in Msunduzi waited all day for leaders to arrive. ANC provincial leaders, who were busy with preparations for the party’s 107th birthday celebrations to be held at the Moses Mabhida Stadium on Tuesday, were forced to attend to the nearly 300 war veterans instead. By late Monday afternoon the war vets were still occupying the party’s offices. “We are currently negotiating with the ANC leadership and hope that a solution would be found,” MKMVA Jerome Langa region chairperson Mxolisi Nyuswa said. The war veterans, who had threatened to disrupt the upcoming general elections if their demands were not met, are, amongst other things, demanding jobs, housing and a special pension. Watch here: OVERVIEW: 'We shall not rest' - Ramaphosa reassures past party leaders during #ANC107 celebrations The protest coincided with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s visit to the province. Ramaphosa, who will address ANC supporters at Moses Mabhida Stadium, was on the campaign trail on the lower South Coast when the MK soldiers invaded the party’s provincial offices. He is being accompanied by members of the party’s national executive committee (NEC) who have been visiting parts of the province to drum up support for the ANC ahead the organisation’s birthday party and manifesto launch on Saturday. While Ramaphosa’s South Coast programme was on schedule, ANC members in the Msunduzi sub-region were disappointed to learn that NEC member and former AU chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s widely anticipated visit to the area on Monday would not go ahead. According to a media alert sent out by ANC leaders in the region, Dlamini-Zuma had been scheduled to conduct a door-to-door campaign in Edendale before addressing a community meeting in the area. ANC councillor in the area Xolani Ngongoma said he had not been given reasons for her no-show. ANC national media liaison manager Mhlaba Memela said he was not are aware that Dlamini-Zuma was scheduled to visit Pietermaritzburg on Monday. The ANC in the province is battling to heal divisions in the region that were created during last year’s power struggle between Ramaphosa and Dlamini-Zuma — who is currently the minister in the Presidency. Dlamini-Zuma’s spokesperson, Lungi Mtshali, said a visit to Pietermaritzburg had not been among items on the former AU chairperson’s diary. “All I know is that she will be in Greytown tomorrow [Tuesday]” she said. The ANC has organised more than 1 300 buses to transport members from all provinces to the Moses Mabhida Stadium for Ramaphosa’s ANC birthday celebration speech — also referred to as the party’s January 8 statement.