A viral video of a Mr D Food delivery driver masturbating while looking at a young girl who had just picked up her food has been confirmed to have taken place in Pietermaritzburg on Tuesday afternoon. The disturbing video went viral on Twitter on Wednesday and shows a young girl picking up her food from the Mr D Food delivery man. As the young girl walks back to the house and the gate closes behind her, the man can be seen undoing his pants and masturbating. The video then ends. Devin Sinclair, head of Mr D Food, on Wednesday confirmed that the incident had taken place in Pietermaritzburg on Tuesday. He also confirmed that the man had not been driving a company car, but that he was driving his personal car, as all employees do. The Witness can exclusively reveal that although the incident happened in Pietermaritzburg, the number plates on the blue Ford Fiesta are in fact false. Sinclair said on Wednesday that the company “condemns the behaviour of the driver in the strongest possible terms” adding that they “sincerely apologise” to those affected by the incident. “As soon as the incident was brought to our attention, the driver was identified and his contract has been terminated with immediate effect. “We have been in touch with the customer’s family and have apologised to them directly for the driver’s unacceptable behaviour. “We deeply regret the incident and will provide them with any information they require to take the matter against the driver further.” Sinclair added that the company’s national driver management structures will ensure this type of incident is not repeated. He also said that “as part of our recruitment and vetting process all drivers go through face-to-face interviews with regional branch managers and receive customer service training”. “Whilst this incident is deeply regrettable, we would like to reassure customers that it is certainly not the norm. Thousands of meals are delivered to customers every day and our drivers are regularly praised for their service.” It is unclear whether the “vetting process” includes checks on employees’ vehicles to ensure the cars have not been involved in crimes, have the correct plates and licence discs. When asked if the company also looked at their employees’ vehicles as part of the vetting process, Mr D did not give a response. Requests to contact the affected party were denied. Tweeters disgusted by man's actions The Twitterverse reacted to the video which was shared widely on Wednesday. While most of the comments expressed disgust at the man’s actions, many appeared to think it was funny. Many women expressed a sense of fear at the thought that this could have happened. Nnoni_McShnuggets: @mrdfood Please Deal with this man in the worst way possible. This is disgusting. Angela Mokoena?: I was so scared he was going to do something to her....that’s our reality as women in this country. Karabo: This is no laughing matter. Mowngez: ...and that’s a PMB number plate; the nos are visible so do your part @mrdfood. IG: @addylebea I think this young lady deserves an incentive for her ‘pain and suffering’ the man literally exposed himself to her, that’s sexual assault. I’m sure a MrD cash voucher will suffice for now until she seeks further legal counsel. Grant Son: This is a criminal case. I AM: I just want to know the purpose of the video in the first place ? Nonetheless this is disgusting and I’m glad you started a video for whatever reason. Thabiso Makhubela: Thank you! Decisive action. Perhaps going forward we could look at a workshop in conduct for the guys? Might be very helpful. Thank you for acting.