It’s the “city of potholes”. Pietermaritzburg motorists are suffering with potholes, with
many of them likened to “craters” in the road. The Witness surveyed residents and found some that really
raised their ire. • Kitchener Road and Taunton Road in Clarendon, and also
Roberts Road, which has a pothole that takes up most of one side of the road; • Morcom Road and Brookby Crescent in Prestbury; • A pothole at the corner of Chief Albert Luthuli
(Commercial) Road and Boom Street, which was filled but was exposed again after
just one day; • Town Bush Road, where one resident reported popping their
tyre on a pothole; and • Balhambra Way in Northdale The recent rains have worsened the already deep potholes on
several roads, with residents saying that recently filled potholes have now
been exposed once again. • Old Howick Road, just before World’s View Road, had four
deep potholes in a row for some weeks. Since the road is narrow and flanked by
bush, motorists could not  avoid them.
Finally, by yesterday they had been filled in. However, a driver said the work
on the potholes was not level and did not look as if it had been tamped down.
He was sceptical that the problem had been solved. The series of potholes on Old Howick Road was flagged by
several residents, who feared a serious accident could happen there, since
motorists trying to avoid the potholes either had to swerve onto the opposite
lane or down a bank. “Pietermaritzburg is one big pothole,” Sharlin Moodley said. Jaiheen Singh said potholes in the northern areas looked
like “mini swimming pools” or ponds. Sbongiseni Shange said roads were so bad in Imbali unit 14
that he would prefer a gravel road. “The whole city is full of potholes; we’d rather sell our
cars and buy 4x4s,” said Duane Naidoo. “There are so many on Oleander Road in Cleland that after
many failed attempts at avoiding them, I just resort to driving on the grass,”
said Travis McCabe. DA caucus leader in Msunduzi, Sibongiseni Majola, criticised
the City for failing to prioritise its budget on maintenance. “It is not sufficient to respond to challenges, and potholes
are one of the easiest things to fix,” he said. “The municipality rather gives non-essential things a
priority, like allocating councillors bodyguards.” He added that another problem was workers who dug up roads
to fix burst water pipes generally left the road damaged afterwards. “The consequence of all this is that we have a city where
motorists do not feel comfortable driving. How can we expect investment into
the city without proper investment [by the municipality]?” Msunduzi did not respond to a query sent this week. The uMngeni Municipality did not respond to a query on the
Old Howick Road potholes.