The suspended City manager Sizwe Hadebe failed to attend some of his scheduled disciplinary hearings. Msunduzi mayor Themba Njilo on Thursday confirmed this, saying the disciplinary process was still proceeding. This, as the DA in Msunduzi fears that history could repeat itself as the City might be forced to ask provincial government to second someone to the post of acting municipal manager when the present acting manager, Neli Ngcobo’s term expires at month end. Ngcobo, who is the chief financial officer, has been acting as municipal manager since August when council resolved to suspend Hadebe pending his disciplinary hearing. Hadebe is facing allegations of flouting tender and recruitment policies. These include instructing an official to manipulate interview scores in favour of one of the job candidates. On Thursday mayor Njilo said the disciplinary processes were continuing. He confirmed that Hadebe had not attended some of the scheduled hearings but said he was confident that this would not compromise the integrity of the process. “I’m aware that the CFO’s term expires and I’m going to allow council to guide me on how to proceed going forward. If council says we must request a secondment then we will do that,” said Njilo. He said he will consult with the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Nomusa Dube-Ncube, as her department would be responsible for finding a suitable candidate. DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said the organisation was not in favour of getting a secondment, as that person would be sent by Cogta. He said the City has been on its knees since 2016, after Cogta seconded Hadebe to act when the then municipal manager Mxolisi Nkosi was suspended. Nkosi did not return in 2017 as his contract expired and Hadebe eventually became the permanent municipal head. “Cogta seconded Hadebe even though he had a cloud of corruption hanging over his head. This municipality has never been the same since his arrival, so as the DA we don’t trust Cogta to second anyone that is credible or has the capacity to manage this municipality the way that it should be,” said Majola. He also blamed Cogta for the disclaimer audit opinion that Msunduzi received for the 2016/17 financial year, saying it gave Hadebe the power to drag the City to the ground. “We don’t know what opinion we are going to get for the 2017/18 financial year, but those who are in the know say things have not improved. “Imagine what’s going to happen if Cogta sends us another Hadebe.”