While some parents are still scrambling to get their children into schools before they reopen on Wednesday, most schools are already at full capacity. Pietermaritzburg teachers and staff were back at school on Monday, setting out their teaching plans, the layout of pupils’ desks and subject timetables and completing other last-minute jobs. Clarendon Primary School principal Kamla Maharaj said the school had finalised all its admissions last year and was ready to open on Wednesday. She added that the school had received “the odd query” regarding last-minute school admissions but they are full. “We are feeling very positive this year and will continue to serve with love,” said Maharaj, using the school’s motto to end off her sentence. Meanwhile, Orient Heights Primary School had around 20 parents come to the school yesterday seeking last-minute placements for their children. Principal Peru Govender said they are expecting around 122 Grade 1 pupils to start school on Wednesday. “We are all systems go. We completed all our admissions last year so we are a little more at ease because there is not so much pressure. “We had parents come in today [on Monday] but we had to turn them away because our school is so full. We had to advise them to look for space at some of the other local schools,” he added. Govender said he feels positive about the 2019 school year and felt that more parents were enrolling their children in school than before. “There is a whole different feel to 2019. It is looking very optimistic. “I feel that more people are looking at education as a way out of poverty and parents are starting to realise the value of education,” he added. Pelham Senior Primary School principal Lorrel Wissing said she and her staff are “raring and ready to go”, adding: “We have so many people still asking for placements but we are just too full. “It is always an exhilarating time of year. It is one of my favourite days of the year. All the Grade 4s entering senior school are always so bright and shiny and full of life.” Pelham had 130 Grade 4 pupils this year and all admissions were completed last year. Raisethorpe Secondary School principal Indran Pillay said the school was expecting around 240 Grade 8 pupils for 2019. KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education spokesperson Sihle Mlotshwa said the department has been prepared since last year for the first day of school in 2019.