Researchers have uncovered cultural practices such as
ukuthwala, forced and early marriages still happening in the secluded rural and
poverty-stricken community of Loskop, near Estcourt. University of KwaZulu-Natal researchers, Lisa Wiebesiek and
Professor Relebohile Moletsane, have, since the end of 2016, been working on a
research project to better understand and address sexual violence in rural
communities. Wiebesiek said one of the key issues raised by the girls
they work with is that of forced and early marriage. “The girls see this
practice as a form of condoned abduction and rape,” she said. She said they met high school girls after school where they
tackle issues which affect them directly. “They said the things you would
expect like illiteracy, teenage pregnancy, HIV and Aids but what they really
focused on and brought to our attention was the issue of early and forced
marriages among girls and young women in the area.” Wiebesiek said there were three cultural acts that affected
the girls — early marriages, ukuthwala (abduction) and another practice called
Egangeni. She said Egangeni was an event that takes place every two
years or so where unmarried women and girls gather at a field in the area
wearing traditional attire and are “sort of paraded across the field” to be
selected by men for marriage. Wiebesiek said it was similar to the Reed Dance
but less formal and organised. “If the lobola negotiations and payment are done that day
the men can take the girls or young women back home with them the same day and
they are then married. It is a condoned practise as sometimes there is consent
from both families and sometimes there is consent from the girls although they
are legally under age; we are particularly concerned about the girls under 18.” She said the community condoned and sometimes encouraged
young women and girls to get married before they finish high school. Once they
marry, they don’t finish school. “Even if the girls claim to have given their
consent, we are very aware that consent can’t be given unless there was no
coercion. It is difficult to tell if there was coercion or not and whether the
family put pressure on the girls to get married because of the lobola money or because
it is considered appropriate at that age.” Wiebesiek said the logic for the families of these young
women is that because they are struggling, they believe that if their daughter
marries into a particular family then that family will provide for them. “It
wouldn’t happen if it wasn’t condoned. If it wasn’t acceptable for a
16-year-old girl to get married, it wouldn’t be happening,” she said. She said they were made aware of abductions and forced
marriages which she described as “an abuse of the idea of ukuthwala”. “Ukuthwala was historically this practice which involved two
consenting young adults, not teenagers, where the man would take or abduct the
woman and take her to his family home and the marriage process would then
start. “Now what happens is that girls are taken, and we know this
because it has just happened with one of the girls we work with. There was a
man in the community who was proposing to her, but she was not interested, and
they were not in a relationship. So he just took her. “[The 17-year-old girl] was walking home from a soccer field
with a group of other girls and he just took her. “The family is not sure whether this is her way of getting
what she wanted, or was she taken? “There is a pressure from the community for her not to return
home because the process has started. We see there is pressure on the girl to
stay rather than pressure on the man to not perpetrate violence. We always see
blame being placed on women for being a victim of violence, like why was she
out alone? Why was she wearing a short skirt? She shouldn’t have gone with him. “And you will hear things like she didn’t scream loud enough
or resist enough so she must have wanted it, which is not taking into account
that probably if you were in that situation you would also be afraid.” Wiebesiek said at the beginning of the new year another girl
they work with was abducted and “married off”. “She managed to escape and return to her home and is
currently at the local police station in Loskop with our community partner
receiving counselling. She should be entering Grade 12 this year. Another girl
we work with was abducted in December and is yet to return. She should be
entering Grade 11 this year,” said Wiebesiek. Wiebesiek said there has been both traditional and political
leadership interest in ending these practises. “There was a task team set up last year but unfortunately
these things still keep happening. Until at community level there is a change
in attitude towards this kind of thing, this will keep happening. “Girls aren’t safe and even if they say they want to get
married our concern is that it is coerced as there are greater powers of
influence around her.” ‘This has been happening for generations’ Last year the girls in the community organised a community
dialogue and an awareness march on Human Rights Day and Wiebesiek said a lot of
the messages were about the customs of early and arranged marriages. “Some of their mothers spoke up against this, having also
experienced this when they were young girls. This has been happening for
generations. The mothers spoke about having been married off at the age of 14
years old without their consent. “I think people need to ask questions about consent and what
are the factors that make this a viable option for young women. In such
impoverished situations we as outsiders can’t go and say this is a bad idea
when it’s the only option for them. People need to talk about it,” said
Wiebesiek. Change needed at a community level Wiebesiek said that the aim of the research is to stimulate
and facilitate some kind of change at a community level. “Our long-term goal is to facilitate some sort of change at
policy level because if there is a clear framework around this and what should
happen in such situations and what is considered consent, then there will be
more recourse and there will be clear political and traditional leadership.” ‘These are acts of oppression’ Cookie Edwards, executive director of the KZN Network on
Violence Against Women, said these cultural practices were acts of “oppression”
especially considering that the people involved were young teenage girls. “The face of patriarchy comes up again as women are taught
to be submissive. “No matter how much we raise awareness ... these cultural
norms just keep on happening. “I don’t know if we’re fighting a losing battle. We recently
had the National Gender Summit in Pretoria but still these things continue
happening. “We go into communities to speak up against these practices,
we tell them women are not objects to be sold but nothing changes because these
cultural practises have been entrenched in people’s minds.” She said such issues should become the government’s
responsibility, but the government says they don’t have human resources and
sometimes no budget. “This is a sad issue of cultural norms. These young girls
have no say, no voice, because they stay in those communities. If they refused
to be married off what happens to them? “They can’t even run away because where would they go, where
would they stay because there are no support structures for those who wish to
escape these situations?” Edwards also called for facilities to be built to shelter
abused women seeking a safe haven. ‘We need to empower young women’ A local woman, who asked not to be named in fear of
victimisation, said these cultural practices were “oppressing” both the young
women and their parents. “There is this mentality that a woman’s place is at home
cooking in the kitchen and bearing children. “The researchers and other organisations working in the
community can speak to the girls as much as they want but not much will change
until the mindsets of the parents change. “Parents should be sensitised about these issues and taught
how to deal with these situations. “We need to empower young women and encourage them to study
as education could be their only escape. “We sometimes find that after being married off these girls
sometimes suffer domestic or verbal abuse from their husbands or his family but
they have no other option but to stay as they have nothing else to fall back on
if they leave,” said the woman. ‘Girl abductions, forced and early marriages a thing of the
past’ Phumelele Mgaga, the ward councillor at Mnyangweni in
Loskop, said the cultural practices of girl abductions, forced and early
marriages were a thing of the past in their community. “I think that parents of the young girls and the girls
themselves realised that it was wrong, and they focused more on school and
education. Such incidents rarely happen nowadays and since I have been ward
councillor [since 2016] I can’t recall dealing with any reports of forced
marriages or girls being abducted.” She said girls were still getting married at a young age,
but said it was always an agreement between the couple. Explaining the Egangeni
practise, Mgaga denied that the girls were paraded to be chosen by men. “This is when girls in different age groups go to sing and
dance at a field. It’s more like a cultural modelling contest. They all wear
different attires to differentiate their ages. “The 16-year-olds are called iqomeshana, 18-year-olds called
are ingomase and then the 20-year-olds are called amatshitshi. It’s usually a
two-day event attended by the community, the families of the girls and other
community leaders. The 20-year-olds are regarded ready for marriage and if any
man is interested in her he can ask her out and if they all agree then the
marriage can go ahead. No one is grabbed and taken against their will,” she
said. Mgaga said taking part in this event was voluntary and that
not many girls in the community participated in this. “These girls are also naughty.
They sometimes cook up a plan with their boyfriends to pretend they have been
abducted and when their parents attempt to fetch them from their partners’
homes the girls say its fine, they will stay. “Everyone knows that abduction is a serious crime and people
can get arrested for such acts,” said Mgaga.