A Richmond mother who spent two days in labour welcomed her first child into the world amidst the bright lights and bangs of New Year’s Day at St Anne’s Hospital. Mesuli Makoba, a 23-year-old law graduate, gave birth to her son, Mihla, meaning “every moment belongs to God” at 1.20 am on New Year’s Day. “I went into labour on Sunday morning, December 30. We were expecting him on December 31 but he decided, no, he is coming into the world with the fireworks,” said Makoba with a laugh. She added that being in labour for two days had “been hectic” and that she had “probably made enough noise during those days for the entire maternity ward”. “It was tough,” she said. “I was able to hold him straight away. I cried when I held him. I was so overwhelmed.” Makoba said Mihla was taken to the NICU ward after his birth due to slight breathing issues but doctors had told her she could expect to take her son home tomorrow. “I knew at 14 weeks that I would be having a baby boy. The gender did not really matter to me, I just wanted a healthy baby.” Makoba said her mother, who lives in Kokstad, had named her son weeks before they knew her baby’s gender, but that she loved the name. She had a natural birth, and although it had been “traumatising” at the time, she was glad she did not need to have a caesarean section. “I spent two days in labour but it is the day after my son’s birth and I am feeling good,” she said. “This is my first child. I was very excited about having him but I also had anxiety because I was not sure I was going to know what to do, but as soon as I held him, the motherly instincts kicked in. “Mihla is very feisty. I think he is a little fighter, just like his mother. I know all mothers think their babies are beautiful and I am trying to be objective about it, but I think Mihla is just gorgeous. “He was due on December 31 but I think it is a sign from God that he was born on January 1. It signals a fresh start, a new beginning and the start of a new journey with my son.” Makoba said her mother and sister would be staying with her in Richmond for the next few weeks to help out around the house and with her son. “My mom says she is too young to be a grandmother but I know she is so excited and just adores him. “My sister will only be able to see him either on Thursday or Friday which she is very emotional about because she just wants to meet him. “My sister is 30 years old and has a 15-month-old boy so I am hoping the two of them are going to be best friends,” added Makoba with a laugh.