President Cyril Ramaphosa has assured Pietermaritzburg
residents that the ANC is on its way to becoming a “clean government” by
ridding itself of corruption and lies. This as Ramaphosa also said the party was now working
together and was united after it had been “tough before” inside the ANC. The president was addressing community members in Dambuza as
part of a visit to the Moses Mabhida region on Thursday, ahead of the ANC’s
manifesto launch in Durban on Saturday. Ramaphosa was joined by a delegation of ministers, including
KwaZulu-Natal ANC chairperson, Sihle Zikalala, Minister of Higher Education and
Training, Naledi Pandor, Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga and KZN
MEC for Sport and Recreation, Bongi Sithole-Moloi. Msunduzi mayor Themba Njilo was also part of the
proceedings. Ramaphosa used his visit to also officially launch the new
Msunduzi Athletic Stadium, where he commended Msunduzi for being at the centre
of physical activity in the country by hosting several sporting events. “We want to fix the problems of the past. We want to do
things truthfully so we can be trusted by the people,” Ramaphosa told some 200
people in Dambuza. “We’ve got a mission to fulfil the dreams of the people. We
don’t want to be the government that just keeps benefitting.” The president would have been referencing allegations of
widespread corruption that have plagued the country in the last few years. This includes Msunduzi, which has been dogged with
allegations of corruption. In a wide-ranging speech in Dambuza, Ramaphosa said the ANC
had launched a scheme to solve youth unemployment — called the Youth Employment
Service — to help young people get jobs in the next three years. He said an
office would be opened in Dambuza where youth can go to seek help on getting
employed or opening a business. He also praised the national matric pass rate of 78,2%, but
called for an investigation into why pupils dropped out before Grade 10. The day began with an early morning walk attended by
hundreds of people from Church Street to the Msunduzi Athletic Stadium in
Scottsville, as part of Ramaphosa’s Thuma Mina initiative to get the public to
adopt active life­styles. Despite promising to be part of the walk, Ramaphosa
did not show up. He did, however, apologise for this at the launch of the
athletics stadium. “I must commend Msunduzi as the centre of physical activity
in the country, where many activities take place like the Comrades Marathon,
the Mandela Marathon… and the Dusi Marathon.” Ramaphosa said: “This is a world class athletics track. I
don’t want this facility to become a white elephant. It must be utilised… and
it must be used to host international tournaments.” The president also visited Siqongweni Secondary School where
he pledged a new library, computer centre and science lab because the school
was the only local township school to get above an 80% matric pass rate in the
last five years. He announced at the school that he would be forming a
reading club nationally where pupils who wanted to join would need to read 12
books a year. The delegation also visited the embattled Manor Flats in
Willowton, where Zikalala promised the ANC would return to assist them with
their issues. Manor Flats residents have in the past protested over their
living arrangements.