It was supposed to have been the day she’d been dreaming of
since she was a little girl — special and perfect in every way. It was the day Zandile Mhlongo and her beloved, Sizwe,
exchanged wedding vows. Instead it was a “disaster”. They claim their wedding planner, Nokuthula Massie Mhlongo,
of local business African Child Events, allegedly did not keep to her side of
the deal by not delivering the services she promised on their wedding day in
November. Sizwe said: “Everything went wrong, from the accommodation
to the marquee to the seating.” The couple said they had been quoted R132 000 for the deal
for their 300 guests. They requested a white top marquee but instead a
clear-topped marquee was erected, which they say meant their guests were
subjected to severe heat. The groom said the welcome board was not delivered and the
wrong tables and chairs arrived. The dance floor was also different to what
they had asked for and so was the backdrop. “The wedding started at 10 am but the starters were only
served at 3.45 pm,” he said, adding that they had to have the food collected
because the wedding planner had no transport. He said the day of disaster reduced his wife to tears. He
added that they were promised they would be refunded R25 000 but this did not
happen. The Mhlongos are one of many people who are complaining
about their wedding day on Facebook. Sli Zuma told Weekend Witness that at her wedding at the
Drakensburg Gardens on November 24, “half the decorations and flowering was
incomplete”. Zuma had to get the hotel staff to complete the wedding
planner’s job. She claimed Mhlongo later offered her a holiday for two to make
up for her “empty promises”, which she turned down. She also allegedly promised to refund a certain amount but
did not. Mhlongo said it was unprofessional for her to comment about
her clients. She added that of the numerous complaints about her, she
acknowledges that there is a “dispute” with just one client. She said the rest of them got what they paid for. “People
know me and my principles. I always deliver and go beyond what the client pays
for,” said Mhlongo. “I will meet some of the people who have posted comments
about me in court because I have taken legal action against them,” she said. Nomkhosi Gumbi made an initial comment on Facebook and it
got over 240 comments and 168 shares at the time of writing. Gumbi alleged in the post that she found herself without
decor at her wedding after paying over R100 000. “A dream wedding turned into a
nightmare, disaster … I had to go look for shops with flowers on the day to at
least get married with a bouquet for the photographs,” she wrote. Mhlongo was also allegedly supposed to do her traditional
wedding. “I had no programmes and no menus on both days.”  She had the guts to show up on both days
lying about a truck transporting the things required to do the décor,” she
wrote. Gumbi said she did not get her money back despite Mhlongo
apparently promising to pay her.