“It was the scariest experience of my life. I am lucky to be alive.” These were the words of a 20-year-old man from Durban, who was wounded in a shooting rampage in Mooi River last Friday. Recalling the horrific incident, which left him and another woman injured, the man, who asked to remain unnamed, said he was sitting with a friend outside the Mooi River Primary School on Lawrence Road when he was approached by the gun-wielding man. “The guy walked to me and he started firing numerous shots. He didn’t say anything, but he was shooting directly at me,” the man said. He was shot in the right leg but managed to flee. “He fired another shot in my direction and the bullet grazed my hand. I managed to run away and then luckily, a vehicle pulled up next to me and the occupants called the police and an ambulance.” The man, who is recuperating at home, said he is grateful to be alive. “I am in constant pain and have very little energy. The doctors said the bullet damaged an artery, but they said the damage was not extreme. I am just in terrible discomfort,” he said. “He could have killed me, but he didn’t. I just thank God that I’m alive.” Speaking to The Witness on Monday, the other victim’s partner, who also declined to be named, said she was recovering in hospital. The 45-year-old book-keeper and secretary was hit by a bullet that went through the passenger window and hit her in the chest. She had been on her way back to her workplace after collecting the post from the local post office when she was shot. “She is doing extremely well, luckily the bullet didn’t enter the chest cavity. It [the bullet] went through both her breasts,” the man said. “It was very traumatic, but she is strong. She had the whole town praying for her and she came out strong. Psychologically, it is still going to take some time, but she is very lucky because that guy was really trying to kill her.” Meanwhile, the alleged shooter, Sihle Kunene (19), appeared briefly in the Mooi River Magistrate’s Court on Monday, charged with two counts of attempted murder. He will be sent for a mental assessment on Wednesday.