Dusi Canoe Marathon organisers say there won’t be a repeat of an incident over the weekend where several participants in an event were robbed at knife and gunpoint by a trio of criminals. Several participants in the 50 Miler one-day canoeing race were robbed of their belongings, but there were no injuries. The criminals operated in the Second Saddle area just above the confluence of the uMsunduzi and uMngeni rivers. The organisers of the FNB Dusi Canoe Marathon (which takes place on February 14-16) on Monday reassured paddlers that their safety will be guaranteed. FNB Dusi general manager Steve Botha reassured paddlers that the safety plan already in place for the race will ensure that there is no repeat of these incidents during the three-day classic. “It is deeply upsetting to learn of these incidents,” he said. “This is a small criminal element that is operating in an area that has been very supportive of paddling events for many years now. “It is a two-way relationship that has seen the paddling community invest heavily in the area, building school classrooms, crèches and clinics over the years through the Valley Chiefs Fund. “The Dusi Canoe Marathon has an extremely good relationship with the chiefs down the Duzi valley and a number of meetings are convened where, among other things, safety of paddlers is discussed,” said Botha. He said he hoped law enforcement agencies would work tirelessly to bring the perpetrators to book. The comprehensive safety plan that is in place for the event would ensure a co-ordinated security effort that will deny criminal elements any opportunity to operate, he said. “The Dusi committee also has extensive relationships with all departments of the SAP Service and on Wednesday [tomorrow] we will hold the Dusi Canoe Marathon safety and security meeting with the Pietermaritzburg SAPS, the Horse Mounted unit, the Motorcycle unit, the Air Wing unit, search and rescue, the K9 dog unit, Durban Metro Police, the Durban Horse Mounted unit and the SA Navy personnel. “At this meeting all planning and contingency strategies will be discussed,” added Botha.