As the festive season officially kicks off in the run-up to an event-filled summer holiday calendar, Pietermaritzburg event organisers said they have back-up plans for load shedding. Andile Mkhize, one of the organisers of the Imbali Summer Picnic and Duzi Eve, said they will hire generators for the events. “These are big events and we can’t afford to rely only on Eskom. To avoid disappointments, we always ensure that we have backup.” Ndumiso Mthethwa, one of the organisers of the Chilla Nathi Cookout Experience, said running generators has created an unwelcome financial burden. “... We can’t have food stalls that use electrical appliances being affected by load shedding. That affects business. We now have to fork out that extra money to ensure minimum disruptions,” he said. Cube Hlatshwayo of the popular Sundance said: “When people pay money, they don’t want any disappointments. If you say you’re going to rely on Eskom, your event will not be a success,” he said. Meanwhile, Msunduzi’s festive season plan will focus on clamping down on lawlessness on the roads and preventing road accidents by deploying additional law enforcement officers to ensure safe holidays for residents and tourists in the city. Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said Pietermaritzburg is ready to put its best foot forward in ensuring the safety of all residents and visitors. “Since we have 22 new traffic wardens who just finished at college, this will increase visibility in the CBD area,” she said. Mafumbatha said having traffic wardens will give officers time to focus on the major complaint areas like near Hlophe in Pietermaritz Street, Super Save in Retief Street, Berg Street, Hoosen Haffejee (Ematsheni) and East Street taxi rank. “We have a unit focusing on collection of revenue for warrants and we have plans for a roadblock with RTI and SAPS ... We have a number of events that we have to cover within our area on different dates.” Mafumbatha said the plan, which is already yielding good results, started three weeks ago. “The authorities will also be out in full force conducting several road safety checks to ensure that the use of unroadworthy vehicles, drunken driving and irresponsible conduct on the road is curbed. “They will also be on the look-out for any general by-law and traffic contraventions as well as criminal activities,” she said.