Building materials worth R8 000 will be given to each family whose home was partially damaged during fierce storms that battered the Harry Gwala District Municipality last week. The MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Sipho Hlomuka, Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza and Human Settlements and Public Works MEC Peggy Nkonyeni, along with other government officials, visited the affected areas on Saturday. They provided the people with much needed necessities. The storms occurred last Monday in the Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma Municipality in Creighton and the next day in Ixopo’s Ubuhlebezwe Municipality as well as the Umzimkhulu Local Municipality. Nkonyeni announced that two contractors will be providing the building materials. The department has also appointed a contractor who will be constructing a “temporary residential area” which consists of two bedrooms and an open-plan lounge and kitchen. This usually cost about R63 000, she said. The MEC also handed over groceries, blankets and toiletries to 26 families in Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma Municipality’s Ward 8 area of Newtonville. These items were donated by the Department of Social Development. According to a report compiled by the district’s disaster management team, 3 040 people have been affected by the storms throughout the district. Although there were no fatalities reported and confirmed, two people were injured, it said. The district municipality, added the report, is prone to incidents that are man-made and natural such as strong winds, heavy rains, thunderstorm and lightning, and structural and veld fires. An assessment of the damage shows that roofs were blown away and walls collapsed. One school and two churches were damaged. Eskom electricity lines were also not spared. The storms also affected 25 dwellings in the KwaXimba area in the eThekwini Municipality near Cato Ridge and 60 homes in Ndwedwe in the Ilembe District Municipality. Weather forecaster Julius Mahlangu said that there might be severe storms in the Midlands and Western parts of the province this afternoon. The temperature in Pietermaritzburg is expected to reach about 29 degrees Celsius and about 28 degrees in Durban today. He said it is expected to be cooler tomorrow with temperatures reaching between 25 to 26 degrees Celsius in both cities.