The 29-year-old man who killed a Durban University of Technology student in a lecture hall whilst out on parole for housebreaking, has been jailed for life. Sentencing Msizi Mbotho, Pietermaritzburg high court Judge Khosi Hadebe said that he had scoffed at the justice system that allowed him the opportunity to better his life. Mbotho was previously sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment for housebreaking and theft and was released on parole. Before that, he had been a social science student for two years until he broke his legs in an accident. He has since fully recovered. Mbotho hit Sandile Ndhlovu (18), a first-year industrial engineering student, twice on his head with a hammer on September 9, in a lecture hall at the Berea campus. Ndhlovu died a few days later. Mbo­tho, who had pleaded guilty to the murder, said that he got onto the campus by pretending to be a student. All he had wanted to do was to steal some things. Judge Hadebe described Mbotho’s actions as “gruesome, callous and cowardly”. “His quest for instant gratification prevented him from completing his studies,” he said. She said that people want safety and security, however, this is not seen presently in South Africa. From kindergarten to university, the lives of children are not secure. She said no parent should have to endure what Sandile Ndhlovu’s father, James Ndhlovu, went through. In a victim impact statement, Ndhlovu, of Nelspruit, poured his heart out recalling the period from the time his precious son was born until he was buried. He said he kept Sandile’s report cards from Grade R. He said when he heard that his son had been assaulted, he and his family members dropped everything and drove to Durban. Initially he did not think his son’s condition was serious until he heard later that day that his child was brain dead. “I could not contain my emotions as a man. I cried hysterically when I saw my only child and hope lying motionless on the hospital bed,” he said. The father said his son’s death has left a big hole and vacuum in his life. “I was overpowered by feelings of denial, hopelessness, helplessness and anger. I became emotionally drained.” He said that his son provided him with the motivation to work. Now that his child is gone, he no longer has an interest in going to work. He added that Sandile’s mother is also in a bad way. She has been diagnosed with depression and she breaks down from time to time. “The thought that our son was attacked within the premises of DUT, an environment which we consider safe for students and our only son, makes us feel an excruciating pain and grief that no amount of compensation can erase from our minds and memory,” he said.