A Mountain Rise man was put in high care after being savagely beaten by two men in the parking lot of a fast food restaurant on Chota Motala Road in Raisethorpe. Zohab Hassen (27) was assaulted after an altercation which ensued when he was parked in by people in what was described as a “pirate taxi” when he went to pick up food on Tuesday night. The incident comes just two weeks before Hassen’s wedding. He is still in hospital. The newly-formed Rapid Response Team, made up of private security, neighbourhood watches and members of police, nabbed both men in their Mazda 323 on Lahore Road, which is not far from where the incident took place. Hassen’s mother, Shanaaz, spoke to The Witness yesterday while her son was getting a CAT scan to check for internal bleeding. “He was in the passenger’s seat and his father [Faizel] was driving. They parked the car in the parking lot and went to pick up the food. They were parked in and my son told the guys in the other car to move. “One guy got out of the car and punched my son while he was in the car. He pulled him out and began hitting him and another guy joined in.” Faizel tried to intervene with pepper spray but was pushed away by the men, who went on to kick Hassen continuously. The two assailants left the area when members of the public began intervening. Hassen was rushed to hospital by his father, and spent Tuesday night in high care. He sustained multiple bruises to his face, and a swollen left eye. Faizel had snapped a photo of the assailants’ car during the fracas, and the family circulated messages on social media about the incident. This led to the men being arrested within two hours of the incident, police sources said. “I was so panicked, and I was just hoping he was okay,” Shanaaz said. “The Raisethorpe CBD is becoming so unsafe.” A police source commended the family for circulating the incident on social media, which ultimately led to the arrest. Pirate taxis have been plaguing the northern suburbs for some time, and the Northern Suburbs Taxi Association previously told The Witness they had to hire private security forces to weed out pirate operators.