 “She was my angel. I miss her so much”. These were the words of the heartbroken father of
Philasanda Zondo (12) as he recounted how his daughter was killed in Church
Street on her way to school on Monday morning. Brian Zondo was travelling along Church Street with
Philasanda, son Fetokuhle (6) and his youngest sister (15) when their car was
hit by a taxi filled with passengers. Sources who were at the scene of the accident said
the taxi driver had skipped a red traffic light and drove straight into Zondo’s
car. They said Philasanda and Fetokuhle were thrown from
the car and Philasanda died instantly. Fetokhule was rushed to hospital in a serious
condition while Zondo and his teenage sister sustained minor injuries. The taxi driver was arrested at the scene by police
and has been charged with culpable homicide, reckless and negligent driving as
well as drunk driving. Zondo said he and his family are “heartbroken” and
are not coping very well. “She was turning 13 this year,” he said. “She was
respectful, soft-hearted and gentle. She was always caring for her friends and
helping around the school. “She loved to help people. She was just my angel,”
said Zondo. He said he had been “absolutely blessed” with his
children and that his daughter and son were very close to him and their mother,
Ntokozo. “There are so many wonderful memories of
Philasanda, so many good times. I miss her so much,” he said. Zondo said his son was still in ICU at St Anne’s
Hospital and while he “is not doing very well”, he is awake and talking to his
father. “He just wants to go home. He wants me to stay with
him. He does not want to talk to anybody else. He doesn’t know about his
sister. “Fetokuhle and his sister were also very close,” he
said. Zondo said his son had suffered a fracture to his
skull and was bruised. “My sister and I were discharged from hospital the
day of the accident. I pulled my arm. It is not too serious. “I saw my daughter at the scene and saw [her death]
was just instant. “I was not really focusing on anything else. “God is the judge of people, however justice must
be served,” said Zondo when asked about the taxi driver who has been accused of
drunk driving. Philasanda was a grade eight pupil at Heather
Secondary School, and before that had been at Northdale Primary School since
Grade R. Northdale Primary School principal Sue Singh said
the entire school “is just devastated”. “She liked to help people. She was soft, and
gentle. She was a little angel with a beautiful smile,” singh said. The 23-year-old taxi driver is expected to appear
at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court on Tuesday.