Two Woodlands families watched in horror as hundreds of litres of water gushed into their homes after a reservoir burst on Friday. The families said this is the ninth time the reservoir has flooded their homes since they’ve lived there, and in 2013 a resident was injured. Water gushed down from the reservoir into the homes from 6 am on Friday. The families desperately tried to scoop out water or remove their furniture, but that proved to be a fruitless endeavour because of the sheer amount of water. In 2013 The Witness reported on an incident where the same reservoir flooded the houses of the same families, and one of the occupants, Lorraine Nagel, broke her ankle. Simon Dombela, whose house is right in front of the reservoir, told The Witness that he was called home from work on Friday after the flooding began. “I tried calling people to help me move my furniture but it’s no use. My children are crying. This is a terrible situation.” Dombela’s home was so badly flooded, and the river of water pouring down his driveway was so strong, that it was difficult to enter the property. He told The Witness he had taken photographs of the damage caused during previous flooding by the reservoir to Msunduzi but they were not cooperative. “I’ve been living here for seven years and I don’t know what we’ve got to do to fix this permanently.” Another family, living on a property below Dombela’s, said they did not know where they would sleep that night. Nagel, who broke her left ankle the last time the reservoir burst in 2013, and her family were sitting outside their house waiting in vain for help on Friday afternoon. “I’m very angry. I don’t deserve this. I’m old and I shouldn’t be going through something like this where I’m scooping water out of my house during a flood.”  Children play in the river of water that spilled from the burst reservoir in Woodlands. Every room in Nagel’s home, which she shares with three family members, was flooded. “All my furniture will be damaged and I don’t know where I’ll sleep tonight. Maybe we’ll just put mattresses on the veranda. “Why wasn’t action taken after the 2013 incident?” a devastated Nagel said. “I’m living with plates and screws in my left ankle because of this reservoir flooding.” Speaking to The Witness yesterday afternoon, Nagel said no one from Msunduzi had come and assessed the extent of the damage. Attempts to get comment from the municipality were unsuccessful.  Water gushes along the driveway. 