A Heather Secondary School pupil was stabbed by a schoolmate outside the school on Monday afternoon following a brief but violent altercation. A source who witnessed the incident told The Witness that the pupil who was stabbed had made a comment about the race of a girl’s boyfriend and the boyfriend took offence and stabbed the other boy on his left arm. A video of the incident, which has been shared widely on social networks, shows a boy walking away with his white matric jersey covered in spatters of blood while another boy is seen grasping his bloodied left arm in agony. A concerned parent, who asked not to be named to protect the identity of her daughter, told The Witness that her child, who was not involved in the incident, was left very traumatised. “My daughter told me there was a group of pupils standing outside the school then the next thing there was blood everywhere and a knife.” Her daughter said that the boy who was stabbed was covered in blood and his hand “was hanging”. The woman said on the morning of the incident the Heather Secondary pupils were told to report any issues they had with their peers to the office and urged not to take matters into their own hands. “That very same afternoon these kids decide to stab one another. They just don’t listen. They are not even over 18 years old, but they’re already so angry and violent,” said the parent. She said her daughter was still very traumatised by the bloody incident. She added that she was now concerned about her child’s safety at school as it was clear that some pupils carried weapons with them. Heather Secondary principal Darrel John refused to comment on the matter and referred The Witness to the KZN Education Department. Kwazi Mthethwa, spokesperson for the department, said they would investigate the matter and will “punish those who will be found to have done any wrongdoing”. “We condemn any acts of stabbing and anarchy in our schooling system. We are not running taverns and shebeens, we are in the business of producing knowledge and empowering our pupils,” said Mthethwa. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said no case was opened with the police.