A 93-year-old woman was stabbed to death by her grandson in Dambuza on Thursday morning. It is believed her body was mutilated. Granddaughter Thandeka Ndlela, who witnessed the incident, told The Witness she had been sleeping with her grandmother, Judith Ndlela, when at around 2 am, her 40-year-old cousin came home drunk and started banging on their bedroom door. “Whenever he is drunk he becomes very problematic. On several occasions we have had to call the police on him and he was admitted to Edendale Hospital’s mental ward. “But he was always fine when he was sober,” she said. Thandeka said her grandmother got irritated by the banging and told her to open the door. “He came in and I think he was carrying about three knives and a panga. He started walking around the room and he eventually knelt next to the dressing table with incense. “He didn’t burn the incense, but he was muttering something that we couldn’t hear. When he was done he climbed into bed with us and slept next to Gogo,” said Thandeka. She said one of her aunts had managed to sneak into the bedroom and hid the knives and the panga. “At around 6 am I was in the kitchen preparing porridge for Gogo. She was lying face up on the couch in the sitting room. “He came running into the sitting room and stabbed Gogo in the chest, I don’t even know where he got the knife. I heard Gogo calmly saying ‘it’s fine if you kill me’ and I ran out of the house to call for help.” Thandeka said she had to run back into the house to get her 16-year-old cousin and rushed him to the neighbour’s house for safety. “When I came back to the house there were already a lot of people inside who had come to help.” Thandeka said the police found her cousin hiding under the bed covers in his bedroom. “His clothes, hands and face were covered in Gogo’s blood,” she said, adding that her cousin had worked as a security guard a few months ago but had suddenly stopped and did not tell anyone why he wasn’t going to work anymore. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson, Mthokozisi Ngobese, said the 40-year-old man was arrested after he stabbed his grandmother and “cut off a piece of flesh from her body and ate it raw”. The suspect will appear in court on Friday.