The City has obtained
an urgent court interdict as striking waste staff threaten to go on the
rampage. On Thursday Msunduzi
finally followed up on its threat to take action against the waste workers who
have been on an illegal strike over salary disparities since last Monday. However, the members
of the SA Municipal Workers’ Union have vowed not to resume their duties and
instead have threatened violence if their demands are not treated with urgency. The city meanwhile
continues to be buried under heaps of rubbish as even those who had abandoned
the protest action and the temporary workers employed were being intimidated
from resuming waste collection. “We have noted with
great concern that some employees from the waste management unit were being
prevented from conducting their duties by the striking employees. “Service delivery is
our key priority; therefore we are urging all employees to report for duty as
per their conditions of employment,” said municipal spokesperson Ntobeko
Ngcobo. She said on Thursday
Msunduzi obtained an urgent Labour Court interdict against the striking
employees. “We will not be
threatened by court orders and disciplinary action. The municipality knows that
it’s been unfair to us and they must correct that injustice,” Jabulani Ngidi,
one of the strike leaders, said. They were considering
escalating the matter to the provincial leadership, he said. Asked about the
allegations of intimidation, he refused to confirm, but also did not deny them. Two of his
colleagues, who refused to give their names, said the municipality must not be
quick to cry foul when its waste trucks suspiciously catch fire. “We are not going to
sit on our hands while someone else is doing our job and taking food from our
children’s mouths. This is a strike for all of us and those who don’t want to
join in must stay at home,” said one of them. At a separate special
financial services portfolio committee meeting, the ANC councillors tried to
shut down DA’s Ross Strachan when he raised his concern about the health hazard
posed by the non-collection of waste. He said the strike
was another sign of the failure of the municipality’s systems of control. He
blamed poor management, lack of leadership and political interference at the
City Hall. “What’s happening
outside is of national crisis and no one seems to care … It’s been 10 days and
nothing is happening,” he said. “Tomorrow is payday,
bazophuza kusasa [they will drink tomorrow] and you will see fires burning,” he
said. Ngcobo said that
waste collection had resumed in some parts of the city. “The human resource
capacity has also been increased to ensure that the refuse removal backlog is
cleared by the end of the week. We appeal for patience from the residents
during this time.” On the finance
(billing) staff strike that disrupted services at the AS Chetty Building on
Wednesday, Ngcobo said the workers returned to work yesterday after a meeting
with management 