A local self-taught photographer is gaining traction on
social media with his three-part series of photographs highlighting the beauty
of Pietermaritzburg. Ndumiso Bonaventure Mkhize (28), who is a qualified
environmental scientist, has opted to follow photography over pursuing the
career he spent years studying for in varsity. The former Eastwood Secondary
pupil said he chose to look at our city in a positive light to capture its true
historical beauty. Mkhize said the idea came to him when he was in Cape Town
around this time last year when he started photography, after realising that
most people had no idea where Pietermaritzburg was or what it looked like. “In the three weeks I spent in Cape Town people would ask me
where I was from and when I told them Pietermaritzburg they’d ask me, ‘Where’s
that, near Durban?’. I’d tell them to Google it, but they would find nothing. I
found this very frustrating considering that Pietermaritzburg is the capital
city of KwaZulu-Natal,” he said. Driven by his frustration, when Mkhize came back from his
Cape Town trip he decided to take lengthy walks through the city of
Pietermaritzburg on Saturdays, capturing the familiar sights of
Pietermaritzburg. “I had no grand idea of what it would become. I posted the
pictures on Facebook and the response from locals and outsiders has been
amazing, beyond what I had expected.” Mkhize said the first series of pictures were posted in
mid-2018, the second series was posted towards the end of last year and the
latest series of pictures were taken and posted last week. His three-part
series on Pietermaritzburg has received over 8 000 views and hundreds of shares
on Facebook. After posting the pictures, Mkhize said he has received job offers
from all over the country.  The young and upcoming photo­grapher said he only started
photography last year after his Cape Town trip. “We were on an outreach trip and were at the top of Table
Mountain when the guy who was taking pictures was tired and I offered to take
over. When everyone saw the pictures I took they complimented me and said I
should consider photography. “Since then I have been practising and have been
watching YouTube tutorials on photography, and so far, I am loving what I do
and the pay is not that bad,” he said. “For now, it was just seeing beyond the dirt and decay of
the city and capturing its historical Victorian era beauty which is locked into
the architecture of many of our buildings,” he said.  Speaking of his experience walking through the city centre
which has its fair share of muggers and vagrants, Mkhize said his experience
has been rather pleasant throughout. “Most of the time I have my camera in my hands but there
have never been any attempts to mug me. The people have been very inquisitive and
willing to pose in some of my pictures. My experience has been great fun so
far,” he said. To add onto his three-part series, Mkhize plans to take
several trips downtown, notorious for being busier and with many vagrants, to
capture the “other side” of our city. Offering advice to other young and
upcoming photographers, Mkhize said, “Stay humble, take advice and be willing
to learn. No one wants to work with a know-it-all.” His three-part series of Pietermaritzburg can be found on
his Facebook page, Thousand Word Photography. 