An elderly Bellevue woman was tied up and raped on the
grassy verge outside her home on Thursday night. The 79-year-old woman, who stays in a complex, went outside
at around 7.30 pm to check if her plants had been watered when she noticed a
man standing near her carport. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi
Ngobese said the woman asked the man what he was doing in her yard when he
grabbed her and pushed her down on the grass. Ngobese said the woman had tried to scream out but the
attacker told her to “shut up” and bound her wrists and ankles with cable ties. He then raped her before leaving her tied up outside and
entering her home. It was reported that the verge where the woman was raped was
not visible to other residents and nobody had heard her screams. The elderly woman lives with a relative who was not home
when the incident occurred. Ngobese said the woman managed to get free from the cable
ties and ran to a neighbour for help. While waiting for police the woman
discovered that three cellphones and a flat screen TV had been stolen from her
home. Besides bruising, the woman had minor injuries and was taken
to a local hospital for treatment. Police are still searching for the rapist. DA ward councillor in the area, Vic Winterbach, said he was
appalled by the attack on a defenceless and elderly person. He criticised the
municipality for failing to clear unkempt grass and fix faulty street lights,
saying this leads to crime. Meanwhile, Plessislaer police are also appealing for help in
locating two men in connection with a rape case that took place in their area
on New Year’s Eve. Ngobese said a 20-year-old woman left her home in Kwamnyandu
location at around 7 pm to buy airtime when a white Cressida with two men
stopped beside her on the road. The woman was forced into the car and her eyes were covered.
She was driven to an abandoned house, assaulted and raped. After she was released the woman realised she was in the
Dambuza area. Anyone with information is asked to contact Warrant Officer
Mthembu on 071 454 5159 or 033 398 9614.