Empathy, patience, a flare for drawing and attention to
detail. These are the characteristics needed to draw identikits of
crime suspects based on descriptions by victims of trauma and violence. Pietermaritzburg’s only police identikit artist, Warrant
Officer Rose Kleynhans who is one of six in KZN, told Weekend Witness that
drawing up identikits “is no easy task” and can be as heartbreaking for the
artist as it is traumatic for the victim. With 25 years’ experience under her belt in the police,
Kleynhans worked in the Pietermaritzburg Child Protection Unit for 13 years
before deciding it was time for a career change that led her to becoming an
identikit artist. She wanted to stay in the police and work with people. “I
have always liked drawing and graphics so when I saw a vacancy for an identikit
artist I applied.” Kleynhans said she had been on various different courses
over the years and continues to do so when new programmes and technology is
introduced. “It was a lengthy process. We had to go for training for
everything that involves graphics, photoshop and computers,” she said. “I love working with people, and my background in the CPU
definitely gives me an advantage on how to handle sensitive and traumatic
situations. “The people who walk through my door are often very
traumatised. They have either been raped, gang-raped, assaulted, kidnapped and
so on. My background makes it easier for me to understand where the victim is
coming from and how to empathise with them. “We find that the more severe the trauma of a crime is, the
more likely an accurate description of the suspect will be given. “Severe trauma will leave almost every detail of the
perpetrator etched in one’s mind. It does not go away.” Kleynhans said it is important to know how to work with
victims of abuse. “This work does break your heart. It is tough and definitely
not an easy thing.” She will spend between one hour to an hour and 30 minutes
with a witness. “When we are done, it can be very emotional because it will
be the first time they see their attacker or rapist since the incident. They
see the face on my computer screen and will get panicky or start crying. That
is also how we know we have a good identikit, unfortunately.” She said that 95% of the identikits she does, are men, and
only about 5% are women. Showing Weekend Witness the process of creating an
identikit, Kleynhans said they are using a fairly new programme that Scotland
Yard had to train them on. Starting with a basic face shape, Kleynhans listens to the
description from the victim, tweaking certain features until he/she can
recognise the person as the attacker. For every facial feature, there are at least a dozen
variants for the identikit contained in the programme. Once the basic face shape, nose and shape of eyes has been
done, Kleynhans can start to sharpen the nose, make eyes more round, change the
shape of eyebrows, or make the forehead more pronounced until a clear picture
of a suspect comes together. “We can make the cheek bones higher, change the eye colour,
add hair, add wrinkles and scars and other remarkable features that may have
stood out to the victim,” she said. She said one needs either a degree in graphic design or fine
arts to apply to be an identikit artist and don’t necessarily have to be in the
police service to apply for such a job. “I think our department is underutilised and that people are
not aware that they can come to us or how we work. “It is a friendly, safe and empathetic environment and I
have not turned anyone away,” she said. Identikit artists are part of the forensics division and can
be contacted on 033 845 8573.