Moses Mabhida ANC activist Vusumuzi Sibiya is reeling in shock after surviving what he believes was a “hit” at the weekend. Sibiya, a close ally of slain ANC activist Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu, escaped unscathed when unknown gunmen tried to ambush him at his house in the KwaPata area on Saturday night. His car, a white Mazda3, was set alight during the attack. Speaking to The Witness yesterday, Sibiya said the shooting happened at about 10.15 pm when he was at home with his wife and their three young children. “We heard our dogs barking outside. “My wife then went outside to remove the laundry from the washing line when she noticed two unknown men next to our gate. She went back inside, and two minutes later, our car alarm went off,” he said. He said when his wife opened the door to check what was happening, he saw one of their cars in flames. “I rushed out to see what was happening but one of the men, who must have been standing two metres away from the front door, went on a shooting rampage. “Chaos broke out as my wife screamed and hid for cover,” he said. Sibiya said that in the chaos, the shooter got away. Moments after the gun shots had stopped, Sibiya managed to run outside to try and extinguish his car. “Fortunately, I managed to extinguish the fire, although it was a little too late.” Sibiya said he feared the shooters would return. “They are still out there. The past few hours have been agonising for my family, not knowing whether these people would come back for me,” he said. He said he believed the incident was a hit. “I believe it is a hit because of the way the crime was carried out. Nothing was taken ... Whoever did this came to do one thing and that is kill,” he said. Sibiya said he suspected that the hit was politically motivated, after he made it public that should a by-election be held in ward 10, he would contest it. The ward 10 councillor position is still vacant after the arrest of Nkosinathi “TK” Gambu and four other men last September in connection with the murder of Mchunu. Although there are no formal processes in place yet for a by-election, sources who spoke to The Witness said it was likely to happen after residents in the area told Msunduzi Speaker Jabu Ngubo that they would not accept any ward councillor in the area other than one appointed by them. Police confirmed they are investigating the incident. ANC Moses Mabhida regional interim leader Thulani Xulu said he was not aware of the alleged attack.