An Mpumuza woman has accused an Mkondeni construction company of turning its back on her after she says its actions caused the wall of her house to collapse in December. Valley View Import, trading as Sealcoat Surfacing & Asphalt, was appointed to tar the L871 road, which runs a few metres behind Xoliswa Ngcoya’s home. She said the walls of her house started showing cracks around November last year and when they widened she informed the site foreman. She said he assured her that it would be fixed but then the back wall broke down on December 27. “They dug up the soil from the banks of the road and left a pile of it behind my house and when it rained the water stayed there instead of running off. “I repeatedly told [the foreman] Peter to remove the soil — way before the cracks started showing on the walls — but he didn’t listen,” said the mother of two. She said the Msunduzi disaster management team came to see how they could assist her but they could only give her three mattresses, blankets and a tent. “I had to find somewhere to rent because I couldn’t have my children sleeping in a tent. My worry now is that last month the construction workers packed up their equipment and left and I haven’t heard anything since,” said Ngcoya. She is paying R1 000 for rent and said this was difficult to save for as she was unemployed. She was fired from her job as a deli assistant on the day the wall of her house fell down. “I called to say that I couldn’t come to work because my furniture and clothes were covered in mud and I was busy trying to rescue what I could, then try and find somewhere to sleep. My former boss basically told me that you either come now or don’t ever come at all.” She has also reported the issue to the provincial Department of Transport and last month an official came out to assess the damage and take pictures. She said there had been no feedback from the department since the visit from the official. She said she did not care about the furniture and other things that were damaged during the collapse. “I just want shelter ... I didn’t have a fancy house but it was home for me and my children and now we might be kicked out of where we live because I might not always have money to pay rent,” said Ncoya. Spokesperson for the department, Mluleki Mtungwa, said they would follow up on Ngcoya’s matter until it is finalised. Attempts to get comment from Valley View Import were unsuccessful.