Local entrepreneur Vuyi Zondi (30) has managed to turn her natural beauty hobby into a thriving skin care business. The former Pietermaritzburg Girls’ High School pupil from Imbali Unit BB is the founder of the growing skincare range, Corium Naturals, which she started in 2016 when she saw the demand for her home-made skin product grow. “I come from a family with a history of sensitive skin and bad acne, so I was always on some skin medication. “I started to cook up skincare products in my kitchen for myself and close friends and I saw how the demand was growing and thought why not,” she said. Zondi said her business has grown tremendously as it has now been tested, approved and is now being manufactured professionally for the local, national and international public. The skincare range offers face and body care products which cater for dry, ageing and scarred skin. “My products meet individual needs and we also try to be as broad as possible and accommodate everyone because not everyone has acne, and not everyone has dry skin so it’s just making sure we cater for every skin type,” she said.  Corium Naturals products. Zondi said she referred to her skincare line as a “natural range”. “Our products are all natural, which means their formulation is based on plant-based products. So we use plant oils and plant butters with minimal minerals or chemicals,” she said. Her skincare products are available on her online store, in various stores across the country and are now also available on one of the biggest online international stores, Zando. “I am surprised at the growth of my business as it had started out informally but has grown to this extent. We turn three in April, so I am really impressed at the pace of growth. I would attribute the fast pace of growth to hard work, but I also think that I came into the business at a good time when the natural industry was just starting out and the demand was high,” said Zondi. Zondi, who is a management consultant by profession with experience in strategy consulting to optimize business performance, said while growing up she had never imagined she would one day be an entrepreneur. “I wanted to work in the corporate world and thought I would stick to it but life always has its own plans,” she said. She advised young aspiring entrepreneurs to study the industry and understand it before venturing into it. “Entrepreneurship is very difficult so when you venture into it choose something you will enjoy and something that you have an organic passion for as that will definitely drive you to work hard,” she said. At the moment, Zondi said she was working on making her products accessible to everyone and everywhere as most people, especially the older generation, were not comfortable with online shopping. For more information on Zondi’s skin-care range visit her online shop on coriumskincare.co.za 