An Imbali woman is fuming after a gang of police officers allegedly barged into her home in the late hours of Monday night and assaulted her in front of her 12-year-old daughter. The woman, who asked not to be named for fear of victimisation, told The Witness that around 10 pm on Monday night, about 16 police vehicles pulled up at her Unit 13 home, which she shares with her boyfriend, to question her about his whereabouts. Some of the officers had dogs with them. She said her boyfriend, who she has dated for just two months, is suspected of being involved in criminal activities, including the recent murder of Imbali police warrant officer Njabulo Ngcobo. “They asked who I stayed with and I told them. They said the person I was living with was a wanted criminal and asked me where he was. I told them I didn’t know where he was, he hardly slept at home. One police officer slapped me across the face in front of my 12-year-old daughter. “My daughter screamed ‘please leave her alone, don’t hit her’, but they grabbed her and locked her in one of the bedrooms. They slapped me again, pulled me by my braids and kicked me. I kept on asking why they were hitting me because I had done nothing wrong but they carried on,” she said. The woman claimed her hands were cable-tied together and that she was dragged outside. When she protested against leaving her daughter alone, the child was also taken, and they were both loaded into the back seat of a police car. The woman said that a neighbour who was driving past was stopped, pulled out of his car and pinned to the ground. “It was like a scene out of a ... movie,” she added. The officers meanwhile made her call her boyfriend to ask where he was, while they tried tracking him. She added: “We drove around looking for him until the early hours of the morning. My daughter didn’t go to school on Tuesday because she was too traumatised.” The woman was eventually pulled aside by one of the officers who said that his colleagues would continue hitting her until she spoke the truth. “I explained to him that I really had no idea where he was. He said they would pay me R10 000 and that I should contact them if my boyfriend comes home,” she said. The woman said she tried to open a case of assault at Plessislaer Police Station on Thursday, but was sent away. Provincial police spokesperson, Captain Nqobile Gwala, confirmed that a case of assault has since been opened.