A parent of one of the two Heather Secondary pupils involved in a stabbing incident outside the school on Monday morning has come forward to “set the record straight”. The Witness published an article on Tuesday about the incident but the parent claimed that the report was incorrect. Her son was stabbed several times during the incident and hospitalised. The woman, who cannot be named to protect the identity of her son, told The Witness that she was at work in Kokstad when she received a call from the school principal around 3 pm on Tuesday. “He told me that my son was involved in a fight that ended with him being stabbed. I was so shocked. I asked him how bad it was [but] he kept on saying it’s really bad and they have contacted the ambulance,” she said. The woman said her son was taken to hospital as he was losing a lot of blood. By the time she arrived he was in the theatre. Then from there he was admitted to the hospital’s intensive care unit (ICU). She said on Tuesday she went to the school to get clarity from the principal. “He only told me that the two boys had been arguing and he does not know exactly what it was all about. “My son is saying they were friends before with this [other boy] but not anymore. He also said that he was busy calling him names and then after school he [my son] just lost it and slapped him. “After that he saw the blood on himself and started to run away. The other boy followed him, and he fell down and this boy continued to stab him,” said the mother. Both pupils are in Grade 12. The woman said her son was stabbed seven times, once in the head, four times on his left arm, once on his right hand and once on his left thigh. The mother has since opened a case with the police. “I only want justice to be done and my son to go back to school as this is his final year,” said the mother. She said her son was getting better and was taken out of ICU on Wednesday morning. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Captain Gay Ebrahim said it is alleged that two pupils from Heather Secondary School got into an argument that led to an altercation. “One learner was stabbed several times and is currently receiving medical attention in hospital as a result of the injuries. “A case of attempted murder has been opened and is being investigated by the Mountain Rise police,” said Ebrahim. Pearl Pillay, chairperson of the school’s governing body, said they were aware of the incident but said she could not comment on the matter until all members of the board have had a meeting.