The family of city man Farhad Manjoo are seeking answers as to why charges were withdrawn against his alleged killer. Manjoo’s siblings, Dr Qurashia (Corrie), Shameme and Shiraz Manjoo, are in the process of writing to the Department of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to “appeal” the decision by the state to drop charges against Bongani Mncwabe. Manjoo (58) was killed in June last year in what was initially believed to be a road rage incident. At the time it was alleged that after he got off work at the Kismet Hotel where he was a club manager, he and some friends went to look at a decor job when they got involved in an altercation with unknown men at the corner of Pie-termaritz and Peter Kerchhoff streets. Shots were fired and Manjoo was hit in the chest. His friend, Rajesh Aumesdew, was also injured in the shooting. Mncwabe was charged with Manjoo’s murder and for attempting to murder Aumesdew. The court was told that the charges were being withdrawn because witness statements contradicted each other. Evidence apparently supported Mncwabe’s version that he was acting in self-defence. In addition, video footage, which The Witness has not seen, reportedly shows that Mncwabe fired shots while he was being assaulted by Manjoo and Aumesdew. Shameme asked yesterday: “Did my brother get the investigation and dignity he deserved? Were there proper/due processes that was followed that informed the decision to withdraw the charges?” The siblings only became aware that charges had been dropped last Thursday. None of them had been contacted by the investigating officer or the prosecutor. Corrie said: “We were dismayed, how could this happen?” Shiraz said that from initial conversations with a prosecutor at the court, he was under the impression that there was a video tape of the incident but that it was unclear. The siblings said their niece, Thashni, was still struggling to come to terms with her father’s death. They added that they were all “anti-violence, anti-hate and anti-revenge”. Said Shiraz: “Farhad was loved and on the verge of having his book So You Want To Fish published.” Shameme said the family was not ‘baying for blood’, but did want an explanation from the DPP. The siblings recalled their shock when they heard of their brother’s death last year. Corrie had returned to America where she lives and their mother Shanthee, who was 93-years-old then, was in hospital. They said that because things were so hectic, and funeral preparations were being made, they did not attend Mncwabe’s first court appearance. They added that they heard so many different versions about what had happened that night and wanted clarity.