There is nothing that is able to fill the void of my son’s
death. It gets bigger as we get older. Those are the heartbreaking words of the mother of Kavlin
Naidoo (27) who was killed in a shocking road-rage incident in the
Pietermaritzburg CBD four years ago. Last year, policeman Thobelani Khuzwayo was sentenced to 15
years’ imprisonment for the murder of Naidoo. His parents, Devedas (60) and Patsy Naidoo (58) now want to
sue the Minister of Police for R1 million in damages for the loss of support
and emotional shock they have suffered as a result of his death. But first they need permission from the court because the
time-frame in which they could institute legal action has lapsed. This week the couple brought an application to the city’s
high court seeking approval to lodge the claim, despite the delay. The matter was adjourned to a date to be arranged. Speaking to the Weekend Witness on Friday, Patsy tried hard
to contain her emotions. She could barely utter her words without crying. As her voice cracked, she said she and her husband have not
managed to pick up the pieces following their son’s murder. “It’s as if our life came to a stop the minute Kavlin died.
Everything seems to be going on around us and we can’t cope, emotionally and
financially. We are deteriorating.”  Road rage accused Thobelani Khuzwayo. Although the couple are still going for counselling, they
feel that every time they move slightly forward, something comes up which sets
them ten steps backwards. Since their son’s death, their health has gone downhill.
They have been hospitalised, are on chronic medication, antidepressants and
sleeping pills. To add to their problems, they had to move twice because of
their financial position. When their son was alive, he had helped them with
money. Devedas said the tragedy will never leave them. “We don’t celebrate any occasions, from Diwali to Christmas.
Our lives have not gotten back on track. Kavlin’s death has been one big
setback. It is very difficult. My wife is even more depressed than me,” he
said. Devedas said his son was “one in a million”. “He was perfect. He was supporting us. He did everything
right in life. He was taken away from us. We battle every day,” he said sadly. The killer, Khuzwayo, had worked for the Family Violence
Unit. The incident happened at around 10 pm on November 2, 2014
when Kavlin and his brother Davelin were taking the former’s fiancée, Sandhani
Padayachee, home after a family braai. Davelin had told the court that the lane was blocked by a
rubbish truck near the intersection of Jabu Ndlovu (Loop) Street and Retief
Street. He’d moved into the right lane and then back into the left lane. Khuzwayo’s car came from behind and skidded to a stop in
front of their car, blocking their path. Kavlin got out and then Davelin. There
were “words and fingers pointing” and then Khuzwayo bent into his car, pulled
out a gun and a shot was heard. Kavlin staggered back and fell. At the time Khuzwayo was on duty and had used in his service
pistol.