 Maritzburg United’s
desperate management have introduced higher bonuses for their players for each
match as a means to avoid a costly relegation from the Absa Premiership. The “Team of Choice”
are facing the prospect of falling into the low-income National First Division
next season as they remain rooted to the bottom of the Premiership standings. However, the clouds
hanging over the Eric Tinkler-coached club finally started to lift a bit after
last week’s commanding 3-1 victory over Polokwane City at home. It was only their
second win of the campaign and first at Harry Gwala Stadium this season. According to a source
close to the local club, the players who featured in that spirited performance
last Friday will each pocket a R10 000
win bonus, and the same will happen for every win that comes from their 10
remaining matches in the league. “Yes, there’s R10 000 to be pocketed by players for every
win. Everyone is aware of that and obviously everyone that was part of the team
that won against Polokwane City is guaranteed that,” said the source. Another source, who
also asked not to be named, said that the bonuses had been introduced in an
attempt to motivate the players during this difficult period. He said this had
been decided on prior to their last game and that the team had become inspired,
wanting to win all their remaining games. “Yes, there have been
bonuses set for the players and they have not lost hope. We’re motivated and
are confident that we will survive the chop,” he said. “It’s been a tough
season for everyone and the recent performances, if you have been watching,
have shown a team that wants to get out of the danger zone as soon as possible. “It’s unfortunate
that we could not get the desired result against Wits [before the Polokwane
match], but we did show our intentions and, with these financial incentives put
in place, everyone is going to be vying for that extra cash. “They are putting in
the effort in training and making sure they make the matchday squad and get
time to play.” The new bonuses were
bound to improve competition for places in the team, which could subsequently
bring more good results, he added. The Midlands outfit
are officially in recess and will be back in action in a fortnight when they
travel to the Mother City to tackle Cape Town City, who on Friday will be
aiming for a spot in the last eight of the Nedbank Cup when they host Highlands
Park. 