A pack of dogs thought to be responsible for at least six gruesome attacks in two months has spread terror in Sweetwaters. At the weekend, 83-year-old Philline Dlomo from the Mpushini area was walking home when she was allegedly savaged to death by the crossbreed dogs. News of the attack has left the community reeling with shock and living in fear. Speaking to The Witness on Tuesday, a relative, Jabulani, said it is suspected that Dlomo was walking home late on Saturday night when the 15 dogs attacked her. Dlomo’s body, which was covered in horrific wounds, was discovered by a passer-by on a narrow pathway leading to her house early on Sunday morning. She had been bitten on the head and chunks of flesh ripped off her arms, torso, and legs. She was declared dead at the scene. A heartbroken Jabulani said he was pained by what he saw when he arrived at the scene: his beloved aunt covered in blood. What hurt more, he said, was the attitude of the owners of the dogs, whom he said did not even apologise to the family nor show that they were affected by what happened. He said while the owner arrived at the scene to check on his aunt, she seemed very indifferent to the situation. Jabulani said: “If she [my aunt] was attacked during an act of crime, it would have been easier to handle because it is something that is hard to avoid. But this entire situation could have been prevented if the dogs’ owners took the necessary precautions.” He said nobody would understand what his family were going through. Jabulani said the family want the dogs’ owners to be taken to task. “They cannot be allowed to keep such vicious dogs. An innocent woman lost her life.” According to residents in the area, another local, Vusi Ndlovu (44), was bitten by the same dogs last Thursday. Speaking to The Witness on Tuesday, Ndlovu said the dogs’ viciousness was known in the area and that he was the fifth victim. Residents said the biggest issue was that the owners’ property is not fenced and that the dogs were allowed to roam freely.  Vusi Ndlovu. Ndlovu said he had been walking to a tuck shop in the area last Thursday night when two of the dogs started barking at him. “I knew I was in trouble but there was no turning back. I picked up a stone to try and scare them off but more of the dogs came out of the property.” They lunged at him, ripping his pants and biting him on the right leg and hip. “I fell on the ground and screamed for help. The dogs were biting me all over. I didn’t think I’d make it out alive,” said Ndlovu. He said he tried to get up, but the dogs refused to let go, inflicting more and deeper wounds. Ndlovu ended up on the road, with the dogs shaking him like a rag doll. “I have never felt so much pain in my life,” he said. Luckily, Ndlovu managed to escape and ran into a nearby house.  Ndlovu shows his stitched wounds inflicted by the dogs. Another victim, Gogo Themba Ndlovu, was bitten by the same dogs in December. Gogo Themba (65) said the dogs attacked her as she was leaving her house. She was bitten on her leg, chest and left breast. “Shockingly, when I arrived at the clinic, I found one of my neighbours there who had also been attacked by the dogs,” said Gogo Themba, pointing to her scars. “We are living in fear. The pathway next to that house has become a no-go zone, residents use another route to get to the main road,” she said. Sbu Mhlongo, the dog owner’s son, said his mother was shocked and saddened by the incident. Mhlongo said while they were not denying that the dogs were responsible for the attack, they would wait for a conclusive police investigation. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a case had been opened at the Plessislaer police station. Ronnie Yeoman, manager of the Pietermaritzburg SPCA, said the owner had surrendered all the dogs to the SPCA. Yeoman said nine of the 15 dogs had already been collected and would be put down. She said the SPCA would return to the area to try and find the remaining dogs.