Flared tempers, angry confrontations and blaring hooters.
This is the reality that frustrated motorists in the northern areas are faced
with when commuting to and from work daily. Motorists are fed-up with the notorious peak-hour traffic
bottlenecks and they want the municipality to outline a plan of action to
alleviate the congestion. Northdale is the most congested area in the city as many
commuters who live there use their private vehicles to get into the city centre
and outskirts. “I leave home at about 6.40 am and only get to work at about
7.50 am, even though I start work at 7.30 am,” said Elisha Dasarath. Dasarath lives in Northdale and works in Mkondeni. “The
timing of the traffic light changes seems to have altered, and cars tend to
drive in the oncoming lanes to get to the front of the roads that lead into
Chota Motala. So the lawlessness of the drivers also holds things up. “It is such a schlep getting to work and the situation is
the same in the evening when people are returning home from work.” Between 6 am and 6 pm, hundreds of cars moving at a snail’s
pace queue in Chota Motala (Old Greytown) Road. The extreme backlog also affects nearby roads that lead into
Chota Motala Road, such as Mysore Road and Allandale Drive. In 2017, Pietermaritzburg was ranked among the cities with
the worst traffic congestion in South Africa. According to a study by transportation analytics firm Inrix,
Pietermaritzburg was ranked fifth out of nine cities in South Africa with the
worst traffic congestion, with an average person spending 19,8 hours a year
stuck in traffic. The Inrix 2016 Traffic Scorecard analysed traffic congestion
in 1 064 cities in 38 countries. Pietermaritzburg ranked 384 out of the 1 064
cities worldwide. Cape Town was ranked first in SA, with an average person
spending 49,1 hours a year stuck in traffic, with Johannesburg ranked second,
Durban third and Pretoria forth. Frustrated motorists said that coming from Northdale, the
roads have frequent traffic-light outages and are plagued by unruly motorists
and taxi drivers who sometimes drive into oncoming traffic. Motorists believe a lack of policing allows the public to
ignore traffic laws with impunity. But Msunduzi Municipality said traffic officers are deployed
in Northdale to assist with the flow of traffic. Ntobeko Ngcobo, acting municipal spokesperson, said the
transportation planning department, which has a system that monitors traffic
signals, is now monitoring the Northdale area to determine if there is a need
to change the traffic lights’ timing. Ngcobo said the municipality assigns officers to busy
intersections to help traffic flow during peak hours. She said car ownership is growing every month, therefore
building more roads will not be a complete solution as those roads will also
get congested. “Experience has proved that the best solution [to beat
traffic congestion] is public transport and other measures such as travelling
in groups. The bus rapid transport system will be rolled out in phases,” she
said. Ngcobo said various demands placed on the traffic department
such as accidents, escorts and protests, deplete the number of officers who can
be deployed at intersections. “These constraints change on a daily basis,” she
said. “It should also be noted that traffic officers also fall
ill, get injured on duty and go on leave. The municipality tries by all means
to ensure that traffic officers are available to assist with the flow,” Ngcobo
added. Another motorist said it takes her more than an hour to get
from her home in Allandale to work in Scottsville. “At least one traffic light is out once a week. They have
all not worked properly for some months now.” She said it would be unrealistic for the City to try to post
traffic officers at each intersection. Instead, she said, driver behaviour needs to change, and
that could happen if the traffic authorities used a small number of roving
units to police “all types of traffic intersection infringements” and issued
fines immediately. Commuters ask: ‘Where are the traffic officers?’ The Witness reported last year that a glitch was to blame
for the malfunctioning of the traffic lights along Chota Motala Road, but Msunduzi
did not respond on Friday to a query on the latest batch of concerns. Other motorists described their frustrations driving on
Chota Motala Road, saying that Msunduzi should deploy traffic officers to help
deal with the heavy traffic. Verona Moodley said: “Whichever road you take you still get
stuck. Every day I sit for an hour in traffic just to get to work — we are late
for work almost every day.” “Where are the traffic officers?” asked Narena Reddy.
“Queues are on Samana Road, Plymouth Road and Allandale Drive. People are not
adhering to the rules of the road.” Variksha Sivenandan said: “We are already forking out so
much for petrol and now we are not reaching work on time. Something needs to be
done; can traffic cops be on the roads to stop all unruly driving?” Krishenchund Ramsaran said: “I leave at least 10 minutes
earlier than usual to travel from Northdale to Willowton Road. Traffic is worse
than last year November.” Frustrated motorist Gerald Govender, who wrote a letter this
week to the provincial transport department imploring officials to take action,
said: “The taxi drivers are always driving recklessly, especially in Manchester
Road, and disregarding other road users.” Govender said it takes motorists more than an hour just to
travel five kilometres. “It’s becoming very stressful for road users and we
need to do something to make our roads safer,” he said. Another frustrated motorist, Verona Moodley, said whichever
road you take coming out of Northdale, you still get stuck. “Every day I sit for an hour in traffic just to get to work;
mornings and afternoons are the same. Besides our cars getting damaged, and
petrol getting finished, we are late for work almost every second day.” Rishaal Sahadew said the roads network in Pietermaritzburg ran
out of capacity a long time ago. “It is in dire need of road network improvements to bolster
the capacity of the network. Something needs to be done asap — no more
excuses,” said Sahadew. Taxi drivers don’t follow traffic rules Shabeer Essack said taxi drivers do not abide by the rules. “There is a lack of policing. They just go through red
lights, stop wherever they want to and drive in the oncoming lane to skip the
queues. Kogilan Padayachee said: “Many people seem to think they are
the only ones who need to get to work. They jump the line and cut in front of
the line and this causes a backup where others now have to sit longer in
traffic. Taxis are another huge problem. People do not follow the traffic
rules. Bheki Sokhela, the Umgungundlovu Regional Taxi Council
chairperson, said they always implore taxi drivers not to purposefully block
intersections, to obey traffic regulations and to show courtesy to other road
users. Sokhela admitted that sometimes their drivers are at fault. “Our approach is to use the Hlokomela Operation inspectorate
to monitor various problem areas on a regular basis and to work closely with
traffic services to ensure that issues are dealt with speedily and that our
drivers are driving as they should.” He said the public can phone their offices with the details
of any transgressions, and should provide the taxi number, time and location.  Road rage is now a major threat to safe driving, says AA The number of reported incidents of road rage has been on
the increase over the past few years. Road rage has become a major threat to safe driving and is
being investigated by the Mrc-Unisa Crime, Violence and Injury Lead Programme,
together with the Accident Research Centre at the University of KZN. According to the Automobile Association (AA), road rage has
been described by Sally Davies, a clinical psychologist, as a social problem
that appears to be increasing all over the world, along with traffic congestion
and levels of frustration on roads. Road rage occurs when people who are
already vulnerable to aggressive outbursts are led to express their rage and,
more critically, direct it towards total strangers. Davies said that from behind the wheel it is so easy to
personalise relationships on the road. “We find ourselves in a position of power and safety, free
to insult other drivers verbally, make moves that restrict or obstruct them,
make aggressive gestures with hands, flash our lights, sound our hooters and
otherwise act out fantasies of being ‘in charge’, as if we have been appointed
road monitor,” said Davies. She said there appears to be various reasons for extreme
rage. “Some people who ‘blow their top’ might have mental
disorders, and a history of assaulting others or destroying property owing to
rage. There are also other antisocial personalities, those who abuse drugs and
alcohol, and just your everyday motorist who is psychologically ripe for road
rage.” Davies said motorists have a responsibility and numerous
opportunities to cool the emotional temperature on the roads. “Every small act
of road courtesy, of giving way, a smile or gracious ‘thank-you’ wave, making
positive eye contact before you join a line, contributes to harmony.” She said
defensive driving is more than just a mental attitude, and there are techniques
that can assist motorists in avoiding road rage and also steps to take when
victim of such an attack.  IRPTN preparation a frustration for Edendale and Imbali
commuters. The widening of Imbali Crossing and road maintenance along
Moses Mabhida Road, as part of the preparations for the bus rapid transport
system, has also left motorists who travel along that route frustrated. Lungile Duma said it takes her hours to get to town in the
morning from Imbali. Spokesperson Ngcobo said the integrated Rapid Public
Transport Network (IRPTN) is now implementing phase two of the upgrade of Moses
Mabhida Road. “A plan was developed to assist with traffic accommodation.
Traffic officers are always on duty at key affected intersections throughout
the implementation of the traffic plan.” This will continue for the duration of construction, which
is approximately two years. According to the Automobile Association of South Africa,
this is how you can avoid peak traffic:  