Despite having rich heritage and affordable recreational
activities, Msunduzi is struggling to attract both local and international
tourists. The City’s chairperson for the sustainable development and
city entities portfolio committee Eunice Majola-Zondi said with the competition
for tourists increasing from cities across KwaZulu-Natal, it is getting harder
to attract visitors to the province’s capital. The member of Msunduz’s executive commitee said the people
driving from Johannesburg to Durban passed through Pietermaritzburg but most
did not even stop for meals at local restaurants nor visited a craft market. “We are not advertising our tourism offerings as much as we
should and that requires both the public and private sectors to work together.
Msunduzi Pietermaritzburg Tourism is trying its best but they also need
support.” She identified limited accommodation options and lack of
conference facilities as a serious setback for local tourism. “We must acknowledge that for a long time we were one of
those cities that didn’t take tourism seriously and as a result we lost out on
a lot of things, including investment by international hotel groups,” said
Majola-Zondi. She said she was often envious of how Ballito had reinvented
itself from a small town on the North Coast to one of the biggest tourist
attractions in the country, in less than 20 years. “We boast about being the capital city of the province but
we have not developed ourselves to standard of being one. “We don’t even have a five-star hotel and we also don’t have
a single large conference venue that’s of the calibre of the international
convention centres that you find in Durban and Cape Town,” she said. Majola-Zondi said local tourism establishments did not even
benefit as much as they could during major events like the annual state of the
province address and other sporting events that are unique to the City. “During the Comrades Marathon most of the athletes arrive in
KZN days before the race but they stay in Durban, even when it’s a down
run  — which starts in Pietermaritzburg.
But I don’t blame them because it is up to us as a city to offer them quality
hotel infrastructure that’s of international standards.” As a member of KwaZulu-Natal’s committee for investment and
tourism, Majola-Zondi does not believe that Pietermaritzburg should be
disregarded as a competitor in the tourism sector just because it does not have
a beach. She said most of the offerings that it does have were not
found anywhere else in the world. Pietermaritzburg is internationally known for its colonial
and liberation heritage. This comes after having hosted some renowned leaders
such as Mahatma Gandhi and Imbali’s Manaye Hall is the place where former
president Nelson Mandela gave his last public speech as a free man in 1961. The hall precinct is currently undergoing a multi-million
rand upgrade, which will include an amphitheatre and tourism route. “The issue of tourism was on the council agenda a lot during
the time of the former municipal manager Mxolisi Nkosi and we were
investigating potential investment that we could attract to boost local tourism
but there was no follow-up after he left,” said Majola-Zondi. She said there was plenty of prime land available for the
development of hotels and conference centres around the city. As an attempt to turn things around, Majola-Zondi said she
was going to start taking the municipality’s general manager for sustainable
development and the tourism manager to the meetings of the province’s
investment and tourism committee. “I want them to go there and hear what the other regions are
doing and see what investment opportunities we are missing out on. Maybe they
can motivate for our city to get some of those projects, because really there
is nothing stopping us but our lack of trying” said Majola-Zondi.