A Hillcrest company that promoted international singer Nicki Minaj’s 2016 South African tour is suing the Department of Economic Development and Tourism for R3 million allegedly still due to it. The claim is made in papers that came before the Pietermaritzburg high court this week. The company, Jalibird, said it even got Minaj — an American rapper, songwriter and actress — to mention Durban, KZN and SA in her Twitter messages to her more than 20 million followers. Court papers said that in January 2016, Jalibird submitted a proposal to the department to contribute funding towards the promotion of the singer’s tour in SA from March 17 to 22. This was known as the “Pinkprint Tour”. In terms of the proposal, the department was supposed to pay Jalibird R3 million in return for social media promotional programmes, pre-concert retail programmes and marketing campaigns. Jalibird also had to take care of consumer promotional competitions and ticket allocations for the Durban leg of the tour. On March 9, the department allegedly accepted the proposal, which committed it to pay the company the R3 million against presentation of an invoice. In return, Jalibird would provide the services. Jalibird incorporated the department’s logo onto promotional materials for the Durban leg of the tour, provided the department with an opportunity to open the tour in Durban, and delivered over 400 tickets for the tour to the department, valued at R500 000. In addition, it provided the department’s branding team with access to the concert venue in Durban to display the department’s banners and other promotional materials. Jailbird also provided the department with the floor plan and indicated the sponsor areas where its promotional materials would be displayed. The company also procured marketing items specifically relating to the department, valued at R273 000. However, there were certain services the company could not render because the department did not give timeous approvals. For instance, it could not place television and radio advertisements due to the late confirmation of the sponsorship from the department. Jalibird had also arranged for department officials to be interviewed in the media but no one arrived for those. Social media promotional programmes could not be undertaken due to the late confirmation of the sponsorship from the department. The claim added that the department has failed, neglected or refuses to pay the R3 million. Despite numerous attempts — including sending numerous correspondence to the department and its MEC — to try and resolve the matter amicably before resorting to litigation, it has not been resolved. Jailibird has also asked the court to condone its failure to timeously give the department notice of the legal proceedings. The department was on Wednesday held liable for the costs of the application. The department is denying the allegations and that it owes the money.