Kavina Rajcoomar was in a joyful mood on Wednesday after winning a five-year protection order against an acquaintance who had stalked and harassed her for two years. She had hauled Swasthie Singh to the Pietermaritzburg harassment court, claiming Singh had for years been harassing, stalking and communicating with her, her boyfriend Salim George Essop and their 11-year-old son. She said in court documents that she believes the reason was that Singh was jealous of her because Singh had wrongly suspected her of having an affair with someone Singh herself had an affair with. She said in court papers that the man in question, identified as Ahmed Khan, as well as Singh were fired from their workplace because of their affair. That man then became Rajcoomar’s production manager at another workplace. Rajcoomar said in court papers that a section 205 police report, which unmasks private number callers, had fingered Singh as the perpetrator of harrassing phone calls. Singh, who was not in court yesterday due to illness, consented to Rajcoomar’s harassment order, and is for the next five years not allowed to insult, stalk or swear at Rajcoomar or Essop. She is also not allowed to enter or loiter around Rajcoomar’s home, according to the order. Singh could be arrested if she fails to abide by the order, which will expire in July 2024. An elated Rajcoomar told The Witness outside court that the entire issue had traumatised her and it was a relief that her ordeal was now coming to an end. “I’m relieved. I was taunted for so long. It’s not nice, nobody deserves to go through what I went through.” She said: “I’m very determined, and I wouldn’t let someone take advantage of me, so I always believed the day would come. It feels good.” Singh’s attorney, Farheim Ebrahim, described the matter as “sensitive”, and declined to comment. Rajcoomar had claimed in court papers that Singh would call and swear at her, harass her on Facebook and had once even called Rajcoomar from a Sasol garage near Rajcoomar’s home, saying she was watching her. She claimed Singh set up two fake Facebook accounts, one under the name Cindy Pillay and the other as Zia Abbas, on which she sent Rajcoomar graphic messages and slandered her business online. Singh initially opposed the application and asked the court to dismiss the application on the basis that Rajcoomar’s claims at that stage relied “very heavily on assumptions”. She described the application as a “witch hunt”. She denied that she’d ever stalked Rajcoomar or set up fake Facebook profiles. She also called Rajcoomar’s claims “vague” and “embarrassing”. She challenged Rajcoomar to “provide direct evidence” to prove Singh created those Facebook pages, and added that Rajcoomar failed to attach supporting affidavits to back up her “theory” that she sent those Facebook messages. During the case, Rajcoomar’s attorneys had requested Singh’s phone records in an attempt to prove Singh was the one making the calls to Rajcoomar and her family. These phone records did not come before the matter was finalised. The matter had been set down for trial on Thursday, but Singh ended up consenting to the order, thus finalising the case.