Being at the “centre” of a controversy that has seen some
heads roll at the Sharks has not affected Curwin Bosch adversely. In fact, the
young and talented flyhalf has learnt from it. The 22-year-old Bosch is back at the Sharks and enjoying his
rugby at flyhalf in the Currie Cup on a regular basis after being sidelined and
shifted to fullback. That was because recently-sacked Sharks coach Robert du
Preez preferred his son, Robert junior, in the key role despite an outcry from
the public and media for Bosch to be there instead. That was also seen as stalling Bosch’s Springbok career,
which had just kicked off, and was why there were calls for at least a rotation
compromise in the position. As the player continued to be overlooked, stories of him
looking for a new home started doing the rounds. But now that the Du Preez family, including twins Jean-Luc
and Daniel, are all history at the Durban-based outfit, Bosch is having the
time of his life under new coach Sean Everitt. “It has been very nice [to be back at flyhalf], I’ve been
working with coach Dave [Williams, attack coach] closely throughout the year,”
Bosch said on Tuesday. “There are a few things that we keep working hard on,
such as my attacking game, to try to be better every week. Ja, it’s been a nice
challenge.” Some might say that being the apparent victim of the
nepotism issue at the Sharks couldn’t have been easy on the player, but he said
he had to manage the situation. “No [it didn’t affect me in a negative way]. I think that’s
all part of the game,” he said. “We’ve all got our opinions on a lot of things and I think
it was just a big learning curve for me. I obviously learnt a lot of things
such as space and timing at 15, and I think going forward that’s going to
benefit me whether I play at flyhalf or fullback.” The Sharks return to Currie Cup action against the Pumas on
Saturday in Nelspruit after they enjoyed a bye last weekend. After playing three matches in the competition so far, the
Pumas are still searching for their first win and will be desperate for one
against the Sharks. “Without a doubt, beating the Pumas at their home will be a
challenge. We know what to expect, they are going to be a physical side and you
can see that they are trying to speed up their game a little bit,” said Bosch.
“... We are aware of the challenge that lies ahead, but we are looking forward
to it. “If you look at the stats, they are a team that concedes the
least tries in the first 20 minutes, but they also concede the most in the last
20 minutes. So, it’s going to take a lot of patience ... We do have a plan to
counter them,” he added. The game at Mbombela Stadium on Saturday will kick off at
3 pm.