Fearing for his life, a Pietermaritzburg man fled Johannesburg and came back home after he was violently assaulted in the casualty waiting area of South Rand Hospital at the weekend. A video of the incident where Lindelani Mbanjwa (29) is being beaten up and kicked by three men in the hospital’s corridors was shared widely on social media at the weekend. Speaking to The Witness on Wednesday, Mbanjwa, who was still visibly in pain, said when the incident happened he had been in Johannesburg for just one week. He had gone there looking for a job as a cash-in-transit security guard when the incident happened. At around 11 pm on Friday night Mbanjwa said he had accompanied a friend to a shop at the corner of Verona Road and Victoria Street in Rosettenville. “I had my licensed gun with me, so I had to wait outside the shop for my friend because guns are not allowed inside. “Ten minutes later my friend was still inside so I approached a woman who had just come out of the shop intending to ask her to go back inside to tell my friend to hurry up. “After greeting her, a man came out of the shop and told me to stay away from his girlfriend. I tried to explain that I needed help but two other men came out of the shop and one approached me and head-butted me. “I pushed him away and all three men started beating me up,” he said. Mbanjwa said he managed to get away from the men and ran across the road. “I took out my gun and cocked it as they were approaching me, but they said they just wanted to talk so I put the cocked gun back in my pants. “When they got to me, they started hitting me again and threw me on the ground. I tried taking out my gun, but I accidentally shot myself on my upper thigh,” said Mbanjwa. He said his friend came out of the shop and helped him get to the South Rand Hospital which was about 10 minutes away from where the incident happened. His assailants followed them. “When we got to the hospital there were no security guards and no staff members in the casualty area. “I gave my gun to my friend and told him to slide it under the locked security gate because I was scared the guys following us might use it against me. “When the guys came, they pulled me to the ground and started kicking me. I thought they were going to kill me,” said Mbanjwa. In the video footage, three men are seen arguing with medical staff through a security gate. One of the men pulls Mbanjwa from a bench and starts kicking him. The other two join in and they drag Mbanjwa across the ground leaving the floor stained in blood. The staff members are heard begging the attackers to stop hitting Mbanjwa but the men continue. One of the attackers is heard asking the staff members to give them Mbanjwa’s gun. After the attackers leave, a staff member is heard saying: “This is so wrong‚ where are the police? Where are the security guards?” Another staff member is heard saying: “Gone‚ all of them. They ran away.” Mbanjwa said he has no intention of ever going back to Johannesburg as the incident left him traumatised and fearing for his life. Mbanjwa was also dissatisfied with the treatment he got at the South Rand Hospital. He said even though he was admitted on Saturday morning he was only seen by a doctor on Monday. He was intending to seek help at a local hospital yesterday as he said he believes he was discharged before he had fully recovered. Gauteng’s police spokesperson, Captain Mavela Masondo, said they were investigating a case of negligent handling of a firearm and that no arrests have been made in connection with the incident. He said it was possible that more charges could be added. He also confirmed that Mbanjwa’s firearm was presently in the possession of the police. Mbanjwa said he will be laying charges against his attackers. “I was scared to lay charges against them while I was still in Jo’burg because I feared they would have wanted to finish me off,” he said. Gauteng Health MEC Bandile Masuku said they have received several reports of violence incidents at some of the health facilities in the province. “We will be reviewing our service level agreements with all security companies that are providing services in our institutions,” said Masuku. He also encouraged every patient who is unhappy with the level of patient care at their facilities to report this to the quality assurance managers.