 A 41-year-old private security guard, who was stationed at
the Luxmi Post Office on Chota Motala Road, in Raise­thorpe, was stabbed to
death in a botched mugging on Friday. The man’s bloodied body was found by post office staffers at
about 6 am in the doorway with a single stab wound in the neck. It is believed that he had just arrived at work for his
morning shift when he was accosted by unknown assailants. A post office staffer who spoke to Weekend Witness on Friday
said the security guard was still alive when they found him. “We immediately phoned an ambulance. The medics tried to
revive him, but he had lost a lot of blood and died at the scene. “We think the people who attacked him had followed him to
work. You could see he was fighting. There were blood spatters everywhere.” The traumatised staffer described the security guard as a
“wonderful” man. “It’s really sad that he had to die like this. He did his
work so diligently and was always willing to go the extra mile to help everyone
around here. “I am traumatised and can’t believe it, I’m still shaking
and can’t work.” KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele
said the man’s empty wallet was found next to him. Mbele said a case of murder was opened at the Mountain Rise
police station. No arrests have been made yet. Meanwhile, KwaZulu-Natal SA Post Office spokesperson Nobuhle
Njapha confirmed that the man was employed by an external contractor. “The Post Office would like to extend its sincere
condolences to the family of the deceased. The police are investigating ...” The post office was closed after the incident. A member of the Raisethorpe policing forum, who was at the
scene but declined to be named, said it was worrying that the guard was
unarmed. “We have a lot of these security guards who have no
protection. “A pepper spray is not going to do anything when a robber
has a gun or a knife.” The member said while muggings had decreased in the Raisethorpe
CBD, more police visibility was needed. “The biggest deterrent in the past has been having
reservists. When they had reservists walking up and down, Raisethorpe CBD was
crime-free and very clean. We are only given the run around when it comes to
reservists. If there are 45 000 reservists in the country, why can’t Mountain
Rise have at least 20 reservists? There are people willing to join the reserve
force.”  