The KZN Museum has once again won the opportunity to host the prestigious National Science Week. The museum will host the event for the second time in as many years. It will be from July 29 to August 3, and this year’s theme is “facing the harsh realities of climate change”. Exhibitions will be held at the Liberty Midlands Mall, both the Eastwood and the Bessie Head libraries and the museum itself, which will be centred around teaching sustainability and practical uses of science. The museum’s efforts will also include outreach work, lectures and interactive workshops. People who visit the museum during National Science Week will receive a small Portulacaria Afra plant, which absorbs large amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The premier event on the local science calendar, hosted by the Department of Science and Technology, has come as yet another boost for the KZN Museum, which had also picked up two SciFest awards in the last two years. The museum’s chief education officer for outreach, Marsha Kalika, told The Witness the museum was excited and honoured to get this opportunity once again. “To qualify we had to fill out a lot of paperwork and submit a bid proposal and an activity proposal, and based on that you get chosen and they decide how much budget you get.” She said the museum was granted just under R150 000 by the Department of Science and Technology. “It will be an opportunity for us to communicate science through activities with the public. There is this perception that science is complicated, but people don’t realise that there are practical uses for science.” Some of the demonstrations will include water filtration techniques, recycling and using lemons to generate electricity. “Another thing we’ve come up with is a seed bomb, where you take clay and potting soil and seeds and make it into a dough and plant it during drought conditions, and as the conditions improve over time the seeds will germinate.” Kalika said getting a chance to host Science Week again said a lot about how the museum is being recognised in the science community. “The museum is a learning hub, a science centre and we try to better people’s understanding. Climate change isn’t about science. It affects everybody,” she said.