A man has opened a case against Mountain Rise police
officers who were off-duty when they allegedly raided his home and beat him
until he was unconscious. Northdale resident Sarven Naicker said the attack left him
with head injuries, cracked ribs as well as broken blood vessels in his eyes. Naicker said that on Wednesday night he had an argument with
his wife who left the house to go see a friend just before 7 pm. “I was alone at the house when two policemen came into my
house. They were off-duty and brought two other people with them who are not
police officers. “When they came in, they were talking to me nicely and one
of the officers showed me his appointment card. “He was not in a police vehicle. “After talking for a bit, he slapped me in the face. He
slapped me again and then shoved the door open, dragged me outside and started
beating me. I was screaming for them to stop and talk to me but they just
carried on. “I heard one of the people begging the officers to stop. He
said to them, ‘stop it, you are going to kill him’. I then lost consciousness
and was left outside my house for dead.” He said he had put R1 000 for his rent under his Bible on
the counter but when he went to get it to pay his rent the next day, he saw
that it was gone and he believes the officers might have taken it. Naicker said the officers threatened to kill him if he
opened a case against them, however, Naicker went to open his case on Thursday
morning. A family friend of Naicker’s, who works closely with the law
and asked not to be named for professional reasons, said no one had called
radio control to send out the officers and that they came of their own accord
after a relative of Naicker’s phoned him. Naicker said he and the relative concerned did not get on at
all and that he believes the man is friends with the police officers who came
to his home. The family friend said there was no complaint registered
with radio control and no incident reference numbers, which police should have
when attending to a scene. “They have abused their power as police officers and the
Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) will be contacted about
this. We are also wanting to open a civil case and take legal action against
the officers,” said the friend. Naicker said he was afraid for his life and feared returning
home in case the officers came back to his house. “I am terrified. I am staying with a friend because I had to
leave my house.” Naicker has been to the district surgeon and is expected to
go for more X-rays and scans following the attack.