A second suspect has been arrested for the murder of Jika Joe informal settlement teenager Snegugu Mthembu, whose half naked body was found last Tuesday. A 30-year-old man made a brief appearance in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court on Monday alongside a 48-year-old man. The men have both been charged with murder and rape, and cannot be named until they have pleaded to the rape charge. Wearing a blue hoodie and black pants with a shaved head, the 30-year-old appeared dazed and looked down during the proceedings. He was arrested on Saturday near Queen Street after running away from Jika Joe last Tuesday. The case was postponed to July 22 for further investigations. While the 30-year-old abandoned his bail application, the 48-year-old told the court he would still be continuing with his quest to be released on bail. During his last court appearance, he told the court he had been arrested by mistake. According to the charge sheet, Snegugu had been raped by more than one person. Angry Jika Joe informal settlement community members who lined walls and packed the court gallery to capacity condemned the abuse of children and appealed for justice for Snegugu. The residents had to be reprimanded after they swore at the two men as they left the dock. Others urged the court not to grant either of the accused bail. One resident threatened that if the two men were granted bail, the community would “deal” with them. “They must rot in jail. We don’t want to see them roaming the streets. We want these monsters to be held accountable for what they did to Sne.” The residents said they were happy that the second man had been arrested. “We can all sleep peacefully knowing that he is now behind bars. Although it won’t bring back Sne at least she will get the justice she deserves,” said another resident. Snegugu’s mother, Phumeza Dlamini, reiterated that she did not want the two men to be granted bail. According to Dlamini, Snegugu’s shoes were found inside the house one of the men was renting on the day her body was discovered. “I want him to tell me why he killed my daughter. She was just a child. They took her innocence and killed her. Why did they have to kill her?” she said. Dlamini said she had helped the man secure accommodation at the informal settlement three weeks ago. “I helped him get a place to stay. He came to my house desperate, looking for a place to stay, and I spoke to one of my neighbours to give him accommodation. I didn’t know that he would one day kill my child.” Dlamini said she was still struggling to accept her daughter’s death. “Everyday I pray that God gives me the strength to accept that she is really gone,” she said. Snegugu will be buried on Saturday in Matatiele.