Liberty Midlands Mall suspended two shoppers who were involved in a fracas over a queuing dispute inside Game on Saturday evening. A short physical scuffle broke out during a disagreement between two shoppers, with one accusing the other of cutting in front of her in the line. Nerisa Mohun, who was involved in the fight, told The Witness she had sustained scratches to her neck and claimed her nuptial necklace, worth R5 000, was torn off her and broken. She claimed she was entering the queue at Game, which is cordoned off, when another shopper tried taking a gap in front of her by entering the queue through an opening. Mohun, however, began walking faster and kept her original place in the line. “But when we got to the front of the line I let her go in front of me,” she told The Witness. Mohun said she then asked the cashier serving her to get the manager so she could ask why there is an opening in the line. She claimed the other shopper then approached her and “pointed fingers” at her. “She was telling me I was talking too much. So I pushed her hand away from me. She pushed me, and then I grabbed her and told her ‘that’s not how you act towards me’.”  Northdale woman Nerisa Mohun was involved in a fracas in Game at the Liberty Midlands Mall. Security at Game then broke up the fracas, and the mall’s private security was called in. Mohun said she and the other woman were then made to sign a form that suspended them both from shopping at the mall for six months. She said the incident has left her feeling angry, and said her young children were traumatised having seen their mother in a fight. “How can someone stick their finger in my face. I am very angry. “I go to the mall often. I have two young children and It’s school holidays now and they love Funtables and going to the movies,” she said. A representative from the Game branch confirmed the incident and said the situation was defused quickly by the store guards. “I didn’t know about them getting banned. It is an unfortunate situation.” Liberty Midlands Mall said on Monday they required more time to respond about the incident.