Over the last few decades the popularity of body piercings
has taken off, according to local tattoo and piercing artist Kevin Govender
from Inkspressions Tattoos and Piercings. Body piercing involves injecting a needle into the body
surface to produce an opening in which pieces of metal and plastic jewellery
can be worn. Tattoos and piercings have been around for centuries and
have been used to express religious beliefs through patterns and symbols. Apart from the common earlobe piercing, Govender said that
tongue, nose and belly piercings have been the most popular lately, especially
among teenagers. Youngsters, male and female, who have indulged in the trend of
multiple body piercings said that they first considered getting their piercings
done for fashionable and artistic purposes. “I wanted to look cool and feel cool with my ear piercings,”
said 20-year-old university student Junaid Denston. Inspirations for new tattoos and piercings are everywhere,
and as young adults get older, they have a greater need to express their
individuality and interests. Another student said he was inspired to get his
nose and ear piercings by his role model, late rapper Tupac. Govender explained that all his piercing procedures are done
with great care and professionalism. Those who are 16 and older can get their
piercings done without parental consent. Before getting a piercing, customers
are required to sign an indemnity form which must confirm that they are drug
and alcohol free. The body can be pierced in a variety of ways and places. Ear
piercing offers several different options such as the earlobe (lower and upper
lobe piercings), the auricle piercing which is just above the lobe, the helix
which is the highest outer ear piercing, the tragus and rook which is found
towards the inner part of the ear and the industrial piercing, which is two
piercings connected with a single straight piece of jewellery at the top of the
ear. Inkspressions also offers tongue, lip, nose, septum-nose,
belly, nipple and women’s genital piercings. The jewellery used for the piercings
are made of surgical steel or plastic, which can also be used for a belly
piercing. Inkspressions completes all piercings in a clean environment
where surgical gloves and sterilised IV cannula needles are used by the
piercer. All sterilisation and handling of equipment is done in front
of the customer and used needles are disposed of immediately. ANY REGRETS? Many piercing enthusiasts describe the feeling of getting a
piercing as relaxing and rewarding. “I have no regrets, I still love my piercings and I have the
urge to get another one. Body piercings can be addictive,” said
Pietermaritzburg university student Priya Singh, who has both tongue and ear
piercings. “Body art is unique, it is special to you and your body. “Piercings can be a great way to express your inner
creativity and feel good about yourself,” she said.