The instigators of the violence that forced Mafakathini’s Ngcedomhlophe High, in Vulindlela, to close for a week have been summoned to appear at Inkosi Nsikayezwe Zondi’s tribal council. The news was shared by Mpumuza’s head induna, Thinasonke Ntombela, during Friday’s community meeting to discuss issues of safety at Ngcedomhlophe following a recent violent brawl involving pupils and members of the community. The school was closed the whole of last week as even teachers feared for their safety as they had been threatened during the fracas which left dozens injured. The root cause of the violence was alleged to be a fight that erupted at a social event a few weeks ago and spilled into the school grounds when armed residents went into classrooms to attack some of the pupils. More than 300 community members from Mpumuza and Nadi areas attended Friday’s meeting. Ntombela said those who participated in the violence have until this Friday to give statements to the local induna, Zwelinjani Magubane, ahead of their appearance before the tribal council on Saturday. “Those who have children enrolled at Ngcedomhlophe must come with them on Saturday. We need to have a serious talk about what happened last week. “If you were part of that nonsense and you don’t come forward, that will tell us that you no longer want to live in Mpumuza so you must pack up and leave because you won’t like what happens when we find out about your role in disrupting the school,” he said. Ntombela said Zondi’s council was now going to be tough in dealing with negligent and irresponsible parents who led their children astray or failed to discipline them. “They say it takes a village to raise a child so we must do our part to protect the future of the children whose parents are failing to do right by them. If a child perpetually comes late to school or is absent on a regular basis, we want the principal to tell us so that we can intervene timeously,” he said. He said those parents would be dealt with by the tribal council and the relevant government departments that are tasked with protecting the rights of minors. Teacher unions Sadtu and Natu pleaded with the community to protect the schools from all forms of attacks so that teaching and learning would not be disrupted as the time lost was too valuable. It was agreed that classes would resume today and Magubane as well as Induna Bongumusa Buthelezi committed to join some of the community volunteers who would be at the school gates to welcome the teachers and pupils back. The pupils would be addressed by the leaders during the assembly.