Today I’m writing about a Witness legend in the form of the
one, the only (drumroll please …) chief photographer Ian Carbutt. I have always known that the media gods shone on us when we
at The Witness were blessed with his genius as our resident photographer. He is
the best in the business. Sadly for us, and our city, Ian has decided to pack up his
lens and is riding off into the sunset in search of exotic adventure. Isn’t he
lucky? I’m as jealous as hell. Ian goes back a long way with The Witness, and I’m sure
you’re all familiar with his sterling work. I first met him when I was working
for another newspaper. I was covering a story about a Berg rescue and had
driven up to Champagne Castle (I think it was) to try and speak to those
involved. I arrived at the scene where everything was unfolding — a helicopter
had landed to whisk those rescued from their dramatic exposure to the Berg
elements away to hospital — and there was Ian, with an impressively fancy
camera and massive lens at the ready, with a Witness reporter in tow. I quailed
at the sight of his sophisticated camera equipment, which only highlighted just
how ill-equipped I was with my inferior mik-en-druk (point and shoot) early
model digital camera. Anyway, Ian and the reporter were understandably furious
that I had muscled in on their scoop, which they thought was theirs alone. I
endured some scowls from Carby and the other guy and smiled back politely. They
scowled harder, bristling with journalistic indignation. Nevertheless, there was a job to be done and I set about
doing it. Every reporter knows that the shot you want is the one where the
patient is being loaded into the helicopter, looking all helpless and worthy of
the drama. I stood at the ready with my sorry little camera, and just as I had
zoomed in as far as I could without losing too much definition, knowing I had
to hold the camera very, very steady at this point, Ian cheekily stepped in
front of me and got the shot. He was all elbows, jiggling this way and that,
snapping pics left, right and centre. I didn’t stand a chance. I missed the
picture. I was furious! Smug in his success, he turned around and gloated, smiling
at me as I scowled at him. It was my turn to bristle with journalistic
indignation. Of course Ian’s action shot — of about a trillion megabytes
and in crystal clear focus — was used large and to good display on page one in
The Witness the next day, while my pixelated shot of the helicopter flying off
in the distance was used in the gutter position on page 427 or something of the
publication I worked for. I invented swear words that day. Anyway, I then began to bump into Ian more often on jobs and
down at the pub, and got to know him rather well. (After his adventures and
into his dotage, Ian should really consider writing a pub tales book, setting
down in print all the wonderful stories he has about the job he’s excelled at
for so many years.) I loved listening to him tell the one about being chased by
lions when he least expected it. Then there’s the one about how while
travelling deep in the bush on some wildlife job, he was called by the news
desk and asked for a stand-alone photo for page one. As he was swearing at the
news editor under his breath and wondering what the hell he would find to
entertain readers in the middle of nowhere, a huge eagle swooped down in front
of him to grab a large snake on the road. And, you guessed it, Ian grabbed his
camera with the hand not holding the steering wheel and got the shot. Good
enough for page one of course. Those of us lucky enough to have had a press trip away from
the office with Ian enjoyed it immensely. I remember a certain press launch of
some Ezemvelo jaunt many years ago. Lots of journalists were overnighting at a
hotel on the North Coast. After we’d filed our stories, some of us managed to
give the others (the boring ones) the slip. After supper we’d thanked our host,
the legendary Jeff Gaisford, and Ian and I, an agricultural journalist, and a
respected environmental reporter from the opposition newspaper, all sneaked
into the hotel’s jacuzzi room and enjoyed a bubbly dip together (clothed, I
hasten to add.) It was a loud riot of fun, instigated no doubt by Ian (and that
wild agricultural journalist). Being news editor for 10 years at The Witness, I worked
closely with Ian, sitting next to him for much of that time, and there was
never a dull moment. We laughed so much. (I’m a great fan of laughter in the
workplace.) Ian brought magic to our pages with his amazing photographs
which elicited “oohs” and “aaahs” at every news conference where he showed us
his work. He’s been exposed to the horror of accident and murder
scenes, the raw grief of relatives left behind, elation as sports teams won,
and he’s been teargassed countless times as he’s covered protests. It takes guts and grit to work under these conditions, and
Ian had them in abundance. He got the shot every time. Ian’s excellent photojournalism has documented so much about
our city — the good and the bad. Through his lens we’ve brought you scenes
you’d normally never have seen in your day to day lives. He’s been to places you’d not have ready access to and has
been our window on the world, right here in our city. Recently he’s been documenting the sad decline of the city,
showing its battered soul to you. He’s captured its hope and despair amidst
action and emotion. So, farewell Ian and good luck. We’ll miss your brilliant
photographs, your wonderful creativity, and most of all, you. (And I bet the
opposition journos are breathing a collective sigh of relief. With Carbutt out
of the picture, they may just get the shot.)