It  may be nippy
today, but in general, where is Pietermaritzburg’s winter? This is the question being asked by scores of locals and
those in other provinces who agreed it has been a “very mild” winter this year. For the past few years we have seen the global record for
highest temperature in recorded history being broken, and it is thought that
2019 will also be a record breaker. University of KwaZulu-Natal agrometeorologist Dr Alistair
Clulow said that since 1880, the globe had experienced a constant rate of
temperature increase as part of the earth’s natural global warming cycle, but
things changed in the early 1970s. He said temperatures are increasing five times faster now
compared to before 1970. “The temperature is increasing at a higher but constant rate
at present. This may continue or even increase further if we don’t reduce the
concentration of greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere. “This can mostly be attributed to industrialisation, the
burning of coal and other fossil fuels as well as food production. “Ploughing and fertilising soils and draining wetlands
releases greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide. “Green­house gases trap heat in our atmosphere. Increase
their concentration and you trap more heat,” he said. Statistics given to Weekend Witness by the South African
Weather Service show that Pieter­maritzburg has experienced higher average
temperatures for May and June than last year and, while the temperature
difference may not seem like a large jump, the effects are being felt across
the city, as well as across parts of the province. Clulow, however, said climate change doesn’t only affect the
temperature, but that there are other factors to consider, such as shifts in
rainfall patterns, more storms and higher wind speeds. “It is very complex and difficult to predict how things will
change,” he noted. Wind speeds can affect farmers as strong winds can damage
and bruise produce, resulting in less good-quality products to export. “Wind can have a negative affect on many crops. “Maize and sugar cane have a higher chance of lodging, which
means they fall over, and fruit can be damaged with a reduction in fruit
quality. “We are going to have to start looking at using artificial
micro-climates and controlled environments because of the changes in weather
and the impact it has on crops. This will be difficult in South Africa as we
use large expanses of agricultural land. “There is a lot more research that needs to be done,” he
said. Clulow added that the warmer the winters are, the greater
the effects on other factors. “Lots of pests and diseases are controlled by the cold
periods in winter. When we don’t experience them, or they are not long enough,
then the plants they feed on can be significantly damaged. “Some fruit trees require chill units to be able to bear
fruit. So warmer winters and later first frosts have a big impact...” The South African Weather Service said data they gathered
showed that while Pietermaritzburg specifically, and KZN in general, received
above-normal rainfall during April however, below-normal rainfall was recorded
for May and June. They said this also explained the average maximum
temperature being below normal during April over large parts of KZN. The weather bureau said the dry conditions during May and June
resulted in above-normal average minimum and maximum temperatures. “The only exception is the north-western part of the
province, where below-normal minimum temperatures were observed during June,”
they said. The Weather Service said some provinces (notably Northern
Cape, parts of Western Cape as well as North West and the provinces north of
the Vaal) have received very “spotty”, isolated-type rainfall, or almost
nothing at all. “Certainly there was a late summer/autumn ‘spike’ in
rainfall,” they said, “but this was very localised”. Pietermaritzburg
temperature deviations in 2019 in relation to normal April – average minimum 0,5 °C above normal and average
maximum 1,6 °C below normal May – average minimum 2,1 °C above normal and average
maximum 1,2 °C above normal June – average minimum 0,8 °C above normal and average
maximum 1,6 °C above normal — SA Weather Service. Pietermaritzburg
residents and people from around the country posted on the Weather
Today-Southern Africa Facebook page about 2019’s “mild winter”. Lynda Tyrer, from Pietermaritzburg, posted: “The winters are
much warmer and drier. I remember not too long ago lying at night listening to
the sleet hitting the windows and being so overdressed to keep warm that I
looked like a second-hand clothing store on legs. No frost to speak of and the
yard looks like silt, powdery and dusty.” Chris van Latum posted: “Yesterday was 27°C, which is nine
degrees higher than the average for Gauteng over this period.” Sharon Taylor posted on the page: “Same in the Eastern
Province, Zambia. Last year was so cold but I have only worn my fleece in the
office twice this year.” Simon Spooner wrote: “Same here in Bulawayo. Warmest July
thus far for many years.” Felicity Schröder Roets from Hillcrest posted that her lawn
is still green and “the cicadas are still screeching, deciduous trees haven’t
lost all their leaves, night birds are still calling. So yes, it’s a much
warmer winter here”. Jurgen Human posted: “The winter definitely came very late
and the day temperatures are much higher than normal.  Maybe, just maybe, everything is just delayed
and the cold will come at the end of July, August”.  Thomas Meyer from New Germany, Durban,
posted: “Maybe the cold weather is still going to appear as Mother Nature has
been acting very strange these last couple of years.” Karen Pepworth Palmer from Pieter­maritzburg posted: “The
fig tree is getting new leaves and we cannot prune roses as it’s still too
warm.” Susan Myburgh Simkiss posted: “Winter? What winter? Global
warming is real and we can see it happening before our eyes.”