Last weekend, I opened Instagram to check on what everyone
was up to. I didn’t expect to be as discombobulated (isn’t that a lovely word?)
as I was when I closed the app with a frown on my face. The reason for this was a post by our provincial rugby team,
the Sharks. When I saw it, I did a double take. Surely this wasn’t their
official page? But on checking, I saw the blue tick verifying the account and
so, yes, it was their official Instagram page with 88 900 followers. Yep. It
was definitely all very official. “They are ready for the start of #CurrieCup. Are you?” asked
the caption over what I felt was a rather smutty gif of two scantily dressed
young women wiggling around, dressed in black bras covered by black gowns. One
actually wears lacy lingerie. They shimmy their shoulders while dropping their
black gowns, smiling and winking seductively, with their best come-hither looks
on their young faces. Oh no, Sharks, I thought as I shook my head. No, no, no. How
could you get it so wrong? I know that the Sharks flasher girls are a thing. They’re a
stunt to draw men. I know they come onto the field and run around, dropping
their gowns at strategic points for the crowd to see their bikinied bellies, each
with a letter (S.H.A.R.K.S.) body-painted onto them to make up the name of the
provincial team. But looking at the gif, it felt like we’d stepped back 35
years in terms of gender politics. Remember those adverts for cars that showed
scantily clad women draped over 1980s style vehicles? Wherever men would cast
their gaze, there had to be a woman there to ogle, to service it. Go to any Sharks rugby match and tell me the audience is
only male. It’s not. Women have entered the domain of rugby fandom and we
attend rugby matches with our partners and female friends. So what is having the Sharkettes (another name for them
apparently) flashing their bodies at matches say to most women? “This is not
for you. This is for men.” It also says that the serious business of the sport
is the male domain and the silly, sexy sideshow is all women contribute. The
flasher girls — the coy in spirit, but sexually overt, male fantasy. And so, while you’re sitting in the crowd before the match
begins, you start to feel a bit awkward as the young women run onto the field
and the men around you make that gross “phrwoar” sound they often emit when
something lascivious presents itself. They clap and whistle. Some reach for
their binoculars. The show elicits a predictable response from the guys. But
women are not quite sure how to react. Do we sit there with a fake smile pasted
on our faces, through clenched teeth? Do we ignore it? Do we clap? Many women
will find this unsettling. It makes us instantly aware of the male power dynamic
and reinforces stereotypes about women and respect, and the objectification of
the female form. And sure, we’ve put up with this, turning a blind eye over the
years, because to put your hand up and say this is not okay, especially to a
stadium filled with many men, will draw howls of protest and derision from
those who feel you should shut up and put up, and not scrum against the status
quo. I can imagine the comments this column could elicit, even as I write it. And what does the concept of the Sharks girls (notice how
they are widely referred to as girls? Another way of diminishing them) have to
do with rugby? What does it have to do with me, a female spectator who doesn’t
believe any sport event is enhanced by scantily clad women? What does it say to
the young girls who are there with their dads? How awkward is it for them to
watch their fathers leering at the sideshow? If men want to look at women in this way, let them do it
elsewhere, away from where we have no say in it and where we are made to feel pretty
awkward about it. What women’s sports codes feature scantily clad men giving
come-hither looks? I’ve never seen this at any netball final. Let me stress
that I am strongly pro-choice and if the young women who make up the Sharks
girls are comfortable doing this, that’s fine. But I am uncomfortable with a
situation where the organisers of a sporting code as big as provincial rugby,
don’t consider the viewpoint of many of those who support them. And yes, we pay
for our tickets, the same price as the men. In the U.S., cheerleading is often a highly technical sport
in its own right and many of the cheerleading squads are made up of mixed
genders. And that’s great. Show us something with skill, something with class.
I’d welcome it. So, Sharks, maybe it’s time to re-examine the concept of
your flasher girls. It’s outdated, incongruous and inappropriate, and it’s time
to find a new gimmick. This one is terribly tired. And we’re terribly tired of
having to watch it. 