As news headlines continue to report child abandonment
incidents, expecting mothers have been urged to consult with social workers in
their areas to learn about the options they have. According to a recent Medical Research Council study,
approximately 3 500 children survive abandonment every year. Estimates are that
for every one child found alive, two are found dead. The study said that 65% of abandoned children are newborns,
and 90% are under the age of one. KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Social Development, Nonhlanhla Khoza,
said it was mostly emotional or societal problems that made women abandon their
babies. “Financial problems are usually not the cause of child abandonment
because the government has made sure that all services, including healthcare
and education, are made available to people free of charge.” Khoza urged pregnant women to consult social workers on
various options available to them. “These include placing your child in foster care where the
child can be taken care of by relatives and they get a foster care grant. If no
one at home can take care of the child, you can also give your child up for
adoption. There is no reason to abandon your baby,” said Khoza. Mark Morcom, co-founder of a local family-based long-term
home Thandi House, raised concerns about the increasing number of child
abandonment cases. Morcom said he opened Thandi House 10 years ago with his wife,
Rene, after they saw an alarming increase in babies being abandoned in and
around Pietermaritzburg. They established a baby safe on Langalibalele Street,
between Masukwana and Retief streets, which is a safe place for mothers to
abandon their babies. “Mothers can open the door and place the baby inside,
when they close the door it locks then it automatically calls our volunteers
and whoever is available or is the closest, comes to collect the baby. The baby
is taken for a medical check-up then we involve the police and social workers
to start the legal processes. “This includes putting the baby’s picture in the newspaper
asking for any relatives to come forward to claim the child. If no one comes
forward, we take the child into our care and we raise them,” said Morcom. He said when they started the baby safe there was an average
of three to five babies abandoned every week in Pietermaritzburg alone. Morcom said things started to change when hospitals were
able to help vulnerable mothers. “We saw the rate of child abandonment go down
to almost nothing, until recently.” Last Friday, Morcom said he collected an abandoned baby from
Jika Joe. “Child abandonment is definitely on the rise again. In the space of
two months we have dealt with two cases of abandoned babies, which is a lot.” Nonhlanhla Shange, programme director at the
Pietermaritzburg SOS Children’s Villages, also urged mothers to seek the
support of local social workers who can help them to make better decisions for
themselves and their families. Several cases since January On Wednesday, the body of a newborn baby boy was found
buried under piles of trash at the New England Road Landfill Site. The body was
discovered by the waste pickers as they scavenged for recyclables. On June 28, a foetus was found on a FlySafair flight from
Durban to Johannesburg. Earlier that week, a newborn baby with its umbilical cord
still attached, was found abandoned under a tree in Phoenix. In February, the police recovered a body of a baby thrown
into a pit toilet in Mpendle. A 23-year-old woman was arrested. In January, The Witness reported that a newborn baby girl
was found abandoned in front of an elderly woman’s gate in Ashdown, Edendale.
Medics said the baby was about seven days old. The Witness also reported that month that a woman was
arrested for trying to kill her newborn baby and is also suspected of killing
another baby, after small bones were found in a shallow grave at her home.