MK war veterans have now turned their attention to private property owners, after hijacking several buildings in the city centre owned by Msunduzi Municipality. On Monday The Witness reported that MK war veterans had taken occupation of several houses and tried to take over a shelter for abandoned children in Havelock Road. A woman, who asked not to be named in fear of victimisation, told The Witness on Monday that about five men, who claimed to be MK veterans, had harassed her 62-year-old mother at her home in Hoosen Haffejee Street on Monday morning. “They asked her to show them paperwork that proved that she was the rightful owner of her house. They said if she didn’t have proof of ownership, they would take her house. Fortunately, there are big dogs at home so the men couldn’t get into the yard. My mom left them standing at the gate and went into the house to call my dad.” The woman said the men eventually left. “They are now not only taking vacant houses but they’re out there harassing people and making them prove that they own their own houses. “Who are they to go around demanding to see people’s title deeds?” asked the woman. She said her mother was left traumatised by the ordeal. The family are still considering whether to open a case with the police or not. Menzi Mkhize, Mkhonto weSizwe Military Veterans Association’s (MKMVA) regional secretary, told The Witness that he was not sure if the allegations were true as he was not one of the people who went to the woman’s home yesterday. Mkhize said if military veterans did go to the woman’s home, it was not to scare her or intimidate her. “Msunduzi Municipality gave us a list of properties that they promised would be allocated to MK vets. “So, I am guessing that the members were probably going around to check if the properties on the list really belonged to the municipality and if they were occupied or not. “We apologise if the woman felt threatened or intimidated. That was not what was intended, we are not criminals. I am sure they just wanted to confirm ownership,” he said. He added that he does not condone any bullying. On Monday the provincial and regional leadership of the MKMVA met with KZN Premier Sihle Zikalala after members staged a sit-in at the ANC Moses Mabhida offices a few weeks ago. Mkhize said it was agreed that the premier’s office would assist in compiling a verified database of true military veterans, which would prevent people who claim to be veterans from benefiting in programmes aimed at veterans. 