A paediatrician on Wednesday told the Pietermaritzburg high court that a boy who had been referred to her by Darren Goddard showed signs of being sexually abused. Dr Matilda Madekurozwa was testifying in the former school guidance counsellor’s trial. Goddard faces 15 counts in total — one of accessing child pornography, being in possession of child pornography, and the rest of sexual assault and rape. Madekurozwa said that Goddard had sent her an e-mail in June 2015, saying that he wanted her to do an assessment on the boy and outlined his reasons. One was that the boy had a learning disability and was not making a lot of progress in school. The doctor said that the child’s parents brought him to her for a full medical assessment a few months afterwards. She wrote down what she was told by the parents about the child’s problems. Judging from what was said to her, the child exhibited signs and symptoms that indicated there was a “possibility he was sexually abused”. A thorough examination confirmed that there were signs of penetration. “I told her [the mother] that she has to report it to police,” she said. Madekurozwa added she then filled out the necessary medical form required by police to open a case. The doctor is unavailable to come to court today and her testimony will resume on Monday. However, another witness will be called in the interim. Earlier in the day, the last of the boys who were allegedly sexually assaulted was back to complete his testimony. The 13-year-old boy on Wednesday told the court for the first time (under cross examination) that he was inappropriately touched during the day by Goddard. However, he did not say this when he gave his main evidence on Monday. The boy says he was sexually molested several times when he stayed at Goddard’s home between 2013 and 2016. On Monday he only spoke about it happening at night when Goddard thought he was asleep. The boy maintained on Wednesday he did not tell anyone about the abuse because he was scared Goddard was going to do something to him — hit, beat or even kill him. Under cross-examination by defence advocate Shane Matthews, he said on Wednesday that Goddard had not threatened him. The thoughts of what would happen (if he talked) were his own. Then the boy said Goddard always said the only person he has to be scared of was him. The boy agreed this was said when he was having nightmares. Matthews asked him if he was having nightmares about monsters. He said no. He denied Goddard said “the only monster to be scared of is me”. The boy also said that Goddard told him that if he told anyone, he will lose everything he has. Matthews questioned him about this in light of his earlier evidence that Goddard was unaware that the boy knew he was being abused (because Goddard thought he was asleep). The boy also testified that Goddard used to shower him with gifts, including toys, three bicycles — one of which cost about R20 000 — two guns and an Xbox. The case proceeds.