KwaZulu-Natal Inland
Cricket are fighting for survival and have sent an urgent application to
Cricket South Africa (CSA) to be included in a new structure coming into play
for domestic cricket next year. Recently, the CSA
board approved plans that will see South Africa’s six franchise teams expand to
12 provincial teams from May 2020. However, the new
structure does not include KZN Inland and this means the death of the
semi-professional outfit as the Dolphins will be the only KZN team. KZN Inland boss Jason
Sathiaseelan says CSA’s decision to leave them out of the new system is a huge
disappointment and so they have written to the national association requesting
to be included. “Obviously we are
disappointed that KZN Inland has not been included in the new structure of CSA
for the senior provincial teams. “We’ve found out that
it’s only for CSA affiliates, so therefore we have now made an application to
be considered for affiliate status,” said Sathiaseelan, whose organisation is a
sub-union of KZN Cricket, which is based in Durban. “We have actually
submitted our application today. I believe the decision has to be taken in the
Annual General Meeting which takes place in September, hopefully we will get a
positive response. We have the support of KZN cricket union.” Sathiaseelan said
local cricket would be severely set back should Inland cease to exist. CSA communication
head Koketso Gaofetoge said he couldn’t confirm if the new structure actually
meant the end of Inland as CSA was still to confirm which sides have made the
cut. However, he did
confirm that only direct affiliates of CSA would be part of the new structure. “I can only comment
once I’ve seen the numbers of teams that have made the cut,” said Gaofetoge. “Once that
information comes to my desk I will communicate that information using the
proper channels.” According to sources,
KwaZulu-Natal will only have one team in the proposed structure while provinces
such as Gauteng and Western Cape are believed to have about three teams each. It’s also believed
that the new KZN side will only contract 15 players. “This basically
impacts our entire pipeline because it’s difficult now to promote cricket in
the Inland area when there’s no team for players to aspire to,” said
Sathiaseelan. “What we do know now is
that there will be no senior team and probably no academy in place because the
academy feeds to the senior team. So, it will have a very negative impact on
cricket in the Inland region,” he said. “The saddest thing is
that Inland has got six cricket districts, which is the largest in the entire
country and not to have a senior team that the districts can feed into is very
damaging for cricket in Inland.” Sathiaseelan said
it’s not only Inland’s contracted players who would be without their jobs if
Inland didn’t maintain their status but back room staff as well, as they might
have to close the office at PMB City Oval. Inland has been a
stepping stone for a number of well-known players over the years, such as David
Miller, Tabraiz Shamsi and Sarel Erwee. The SA Cricketers
Association are also known to be fighting the new system because many
professional players would fall by the wayside.