A gangland-like shooting that saw alleged Sobantu drug lord Nhlanhla Mkhize gunned down in Eastwood this week, may be an act of revenge for the death of Shane Patchay. Two other men were also shot at and one was seriously injured. Tensions are running high in the area in the wake of Mkhize’s murder. Mkhize (51) was shot four times in the head and back on Tuesday night by an unknown gunman who opened fire on him in Patrys Road. According to the Mountain Rise police acting spokesperson Sean Singh, Mkhize and two other men were leaving a memorial service marking the 40th day after Patchay died, when they were ambushed by the shooter at around 8.55 pm. The names of the other two men who were also embroiled in the shooting in which Mkhize was killed, have not been released by police and The Witness was not able to ascertain their identities. One man is reportedly in hospital after he was shot in the back and neck and a third escaped unscathed. No arrests have been made yet in connection with the incident. Patchay, the former Eastwood Cash Money Brothers gangster, was shot execution-style outside his home in March. According to Mkhize’s brother Sibusiso, who spoke to The Witness on Thursday, there were rumours that Mkhize had been linked to Patchay’s shooting, fuelling speculation that his murder was a revenge attack. Sibusiso said his brother and Patchay were friends. He said a group of Patchay’s friends had gathered for a braai at a house in Patrys Road after attending the memorial service on Tuesday. It is believed Mkhize had received a phone call from an unidentified caller inviting him to the memorial service and braai afterwards. Sibusiso said Mkhize was killed after being summoned outside the gate by one of Patchay’s friends who was also at the braai. As the shots rang out, Mkhize’s stunned friends ran to his aid, but they too were shot at and saw the alleged shooter fleeing in a car. Sibusiso said days after Patchay’s murder, rumours had surfaced that his brother had shot him. “He only went there to put those rumours to bed and to set the record straight. He also wanted to pay his respects because Shane was his friend too. My brother was a very straight forward person and he told us that he did not kill Shane,” he said. “Why would he attend a memorial service for someone he had [allegedly] killed?” Sibusiso said they believed that the hit was well-planned. “He was killed for something he didn’t do. He was innocent,” Sibusiso told The Witness. Sibusiso said his brother had survived another attempt on his life just a few days before he was shot dead. According to his family, on Saturday night, Mkhize was fetched by some of Patchay’s friends and taken to the Edendale area to be killed. However, he managed to jump out of a moving vehicle when he realised he was going to be killed. “He was still injured and could not walk properly when they shot him. The plan was to kill him before the 40th day anniversary but they failed,” he said. Sibusiso, who went to the scene after the shooting, said he was shocked when none of the onlookers could tell him who had killed his brother. “They were all there. They know who killed Nhlanhla. If it was not one of them ... they hired the hitmen,” he said. He told The Witness that when he arrived at the scene, Mkhize’s bloodied and bullet-riddled body lay slumped face down on the road. Sibusiso alleges that police could not find any spent cartridges at the scene, as the shooter had allegedly picked them up before fleeing. “There was so much blood and part of his brain was showing through the wound on his head,” he said. He described Mkhize as a “real people person”. “He would go out of his way to help strangers. He was also very family orientated. Although he did his business on the streets, he loved his family.” Mkhize, a father of five, was feared as an alleged drug lord in Sobantu, and sources in the police expressed worries that if those in his ranks lash out in retaliation, more blood could be shed. Efforts to get comment from Patchay’s family on Thursday were unsuccessful. A family member who spoke to The Witness said she was in a meeting and could not comment on the incident.