A local woman is distraught after her three-month-old baby girl was stolen in Church Street on Thursday afternoon. Nombulelo Molefe (25), who stays in Swapo B but is originally from Matatiele in the Eastern Cape, said her baby, Ntando, was taken by a woman whom she had met at East-Boom Clinic while she was still pregnant. Molefe came to know the woman when they were both pregnant and used to attend clinic appointments together. The woman allegedly told Molefe that she had also given birth to a baby girl. “She told me that she had taken her baby back home because she worked as a cleaner somewhere on Boshoff Street and couldn’t look after her. She also said she was from Matatiele but stays in Ashdown,” said Molefe. She said she had ran into the woman again at the clinic on Wednesday. Molefe said she told her that she has been having trouble replacing her missing identity document as she had no one to represent her at Home Affairs. “[The woman]offered to introduce me to a friend of hers who can help me. She said I should meet them in town the next day.”  Baby Ntando Molefe. Molefe met her friend outside the Home Affairs offices in Church Street around noon and they waited together for the other woman. The friend used Molefe’s phone to call the other woman. “We were supposed to go with the woman to the police station to write an affidavit together and then go to Home Affairs. The woman called around 3 pm and told us to meet her outside Truworths so we walked there. [The alleged baby snatcher] was carrying my baby for me and I was carrying the bag. When we got there, I realised that I had forgotten the baby carrier at Home Affairs.” Molefe gave the woman the baby’s bag and ran back to Home Affairs to fetch the baby carrier. When she returned, the woman was nowhere to be found. “I panicked. I tried calling [the alleged baby snatcher] and the [other] woman that we were supposed to meet but both their phones were off. I didn’t know what to do.” Molefe ran to Pietermaritzburg police station, where they had planned to go for the affidavit, to look for the two women and her baby but they were not there. She then ran to Home Affairs hoping to find them, but they were also not there. Defeated, she went back to the police station to report her baby missing. “I’m starting to think that this was her [the alleged baby snatcher’s] plan all along ... I am still in disbelief and pray that my baby is found and returned back to me in one piece. I am also worried because I only breast feed her and this will be the first night she’ll spend without me,” said Molefe. She described the alleged baby snatcher as a short, light-skinned woman aged around 35 years old. Pietermaritzburg police station spokesperson Khosi Khonjelwayo urged anyone with any information to call the police on 033 845 2420.