The mother of a boy who was allegedly raped by Darren Goddard has dismissed allegations that she tried to extort money from him. She was yesterday cross-examined by Goddard’s advocate, Shane Matthews, in the Pietermaritzburg high court. The woman told Judge Kate Pillay and her assessor that she and Goddard had been close friends. She said he was a “father figure” to her son and that the boy often spent weekends with Goddard, who used to spoil him with gifts. Goddard was arrested in June 2016. The woman said their relationship soured when she found out the next month, on July 19, that he had allegedly sexually assaulted her son. Matthews has insinuated through his cross-examination that the charges involving her son came about because Goddard did not want to leave his assets and money to her. The woman said she found out that Goddard had touched her son inappropriately on the 19th while he was in prison. She said he told her the devastating news over the phone. She said she visited him the next day for him to explain himself. From then, she no longer supported him. Matthews quizzed her about sending a letter to Goddard while he was in custody asking him to sign a will and forms from Old Mutual and Sanlam, making her a beneficiary to his policies. The woman said that after she found out the “truth” on the 19th she did not want anything from Goddard. Before that she wanted him to sign the documents. She thought he might be killed in prison and therefore should leave everything to her and her family so that they could leave the country, she said. Goddard’s version, said Matthews, is that the telephonic conversation they had on the 19th was all about her being upset and angry because he did not sign the documents. “He denies ever saying he touched the boy inappropriately,” said Matthews, to which the woman replied that Goddard’s version was lies. Matthews referred her to e-mails between her and Goddard’s mother, dated July 20 that same year. On that morning, the woman wrote she “undertakes” not to touch any of Goddard’s bank accounts — to which he had initially given her access. However, that night, Matthews said, she transferred R9 000 from Goddard’s revolving credit account into his cheque account and then into her own account. The judge cautioned her that she did not have to answer questions that might implicate her in a crime. She said she did not want to comment. The woman was also questioned about a message she sent Goddard prior to any of the allegations being levelled against him. In it, she said he must take her son because she did not want him and no one wanted him. The child had apparently got angry and broke her cellphone. The woman told Goddard he had until 4 pm to fetch the child or she would leave him at a police station. She said she could not recall this and at the time when that message was sent she had a nervous breakdown. Her cross-examination continues on Monday.