A two-year-old baby boy was gagged with duct tape while his mother was tied up with a bin bag over her head and strangled during a home invasion in Scottsville yesterday. Their assailants also used a crowbar to pry the family’s safe off the wall. It contained jewellery and cash. The family asked not to be named for safety reasons. The mother was asleep when intruders gained access to the house yesterday morning and put a bin bag over her head, sealing it with duct tape. After the ordeal, she managed to tear the bin bag off her head and call family members for help. When The Witness arrived at the home yesterday morning, several community members were outside the house, along with police, private security companies and paramedics. The 36-year-old mother and the toddler were taken to hospital. A relative, who did not want to be named, said the mother had x-rays done, which showed no injuries. The toddler was also found to be uninjured. Both the mother and child were discharged yesterday afternoon. The woman’s husband was at work at the time of the attack and a seven-year-old daughter was at school. The relative said the family had been left traumatised by the incident. She said they were thankful the daughter wasn’t there at the time because she might have got hurt. “Luckily the mother didn’t get any cuts or bruises, but she must have been gasping for air. Thank God her hands weren’t tied, so she was able to get help,” the shaken family member said. The relative added that intruders had taken money from a wallet inside the mother’s handbag. The family suspects an employee of being an accomplice to the crime, since there was no forced entry and the employee, who was at work that day, was nowhere to be seen after the incident. They said the employee had taken the keys and gate remote. “They will have to change the locks now,” the relative said. The family had been living in their home for about five years. It is on a quiet road flanked by large, empty fields. Imraan Osman, of the Walungisa Protection Services security company, which was on scene, advised residents to be vigilant and not to disclose anything to employees. “Crime has dropped drastically in the area, but we do get a lot of petty crimes. But people must still be aware that criminals are lurking in the area and criminals are observant. “Don’t keep things out in the open, and don’t show anyone, like employees, what you have.” Police confirmed a case of house robbery was under investigation. 