KwaZulu-Natal is in the grip of an escalating war that has
seen long-distance trucks torched and truck drivers being attacked. The incidents have sparked fear in the road-freight
logistics industry, as many logistics companies have been forced to park their
trucks for fear of attack. Last Sunday night, two trucks had bricks thrown at them
while driving through Pietermaritzburg. The bricks shattered a windscreen,
narrowly missing the driver and hitting the second driver who was sleeping
inside. The incident came after the N3 was blocked at several
points, including Townhill as well as the R34 near Richards Bay, last month. There is only one consensus from the South African drivers:
logistic companies should immediately dismiss all foreign drivers and only
employ South African drivers. This week, KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel
Thembeka Mbele said no arrests have been made thus far in connection with any
of the attacks. Mbele said, however, that investigations into the various
attacks are continuing. “We are on top of the situation,” she said. “Police are conducting intensive operations to curb similar
incidents and arrest the perpetrators. “The motive of the attacks is part of ongoing investigations.
Crime intelligence is working on those causing the disruptions, especially in
KZN. We have averted a lot of situations that would have caused further
disruptions and destruction,” she said. She said there are no identified hot spots for the attacks,
adding that they happen in any area. Mbele implored truck drivers to stop only at the designated
truck stops. “They must refrain from stopping anywhere on the roadside. They
must always be alert,” she said. Truck owners who spoke to Weekend Witness this week said the
ugly incidents taints the industry’s reputation. Ashan Nunkoo of Scorpio Transport, who had his freight
liner’s horse torched in March, said it has impacted on his business. “Losing a
truck has not only impacted on business operations, but I feel we will lose
credibility in the market. People will not feel their goods are protected by
us. “We are now a vehicle short, which we are still paying
instalments towards. We cannot allow this to continue,” said Nunkoo. A truck owner speaking on condition of anonymity, said: “We
have to keep our trucks on the road to be in business, but I’m very concerned
about my trucks.” He added that truck owners are worried about the lack of
government action to address the matter. “Since we met with government
officials, there has been no movement and there are no police on the N3. If the
area is a hot spot, it doesn’t make sense not to police it.”  The smashed window of the Time-Link truck that had a brick thrown through its windscreen from a bridge near the Liberty Midlands Mall last Sunday. Another truck owner who asked not to be named, said his
truck driver had to abandon his truck when he was attacked earlier this year.
“This situation has been so stressful to the transport fraternity as it is
affecting our livelihood. There seem to be no warnings at all as this took us
by great surprise and we are caught in the crossfire.” According to the Positive Freight Solutions Forum, a
trucking forum representing more than 300 operators and 4 000 trucks, since
2015, 40 long-distance haulage trucks have been destroyed in KwaZulu-Natal. In April last year, 35 trucks were damaged along the N3 in
Mooi River. Trucks were also looted. Last month, an SK Trucking driver was pulled out of his
truck before his attackers doused him and his truck with petrol. The attackers
then parked the truck across all three lanes, causing three cars to crash into
it due to poor visibility in misty conditions. In March, The Witness reported that 11 trucks were set
alight on the N3 between Mooi River and Estcourt. Four of the trucks were
petrol bombed in the early hours of March 21, and a truck driver badly beaten.
In another incident also in March, the N3 was blocked at Cliffdale by a group
who were reportedly asking truck drivers for their licences. On May 3, a truck driver was injured when his truck was set
alight on the N3 near Ohrtmann Road. The driver sustained burns to his
arm. Two weeks ago, an inter-departmental team headed by
Transport Minister Blade Nzimande, met with the representatives of the National
Bargaining Council (Freight) and the All Truck Drivers Foundation.  Protesters who attempted to block the N3 southbound at Cato Ridge last month were quickly dispersed by the police. A subsequent report from the ministerial team said it had
found that some employers have been accused of flouting labour laws. The report
said there is also rife fraudulent abuse of the Zimbabwe Exemption Permit and
the selling of driver’s licences by foreign drivers and by some South Africans
and companies. The ministerial team also raised the concern that some
companies are employing people on a visitor’s visa, which is against the
provisions of the Immigration Act. In terms of the law, employers are required to ascertain the
status of the foreign nationals they intend to appoint before employing them. The Positive Freight Solutions Forum has said that the employment
requirement for the industry demands requisite experience before allowing
people to work for long-distance haulage companies. While the forum confirmed
that the industry employs foreign nationals, it said those workers have the
right documentation and are legally allowed to work in South Africa. It said
foreign truck drivers are paid salaries in line with the rates agreed at the
National Bargaining Council for the Road Freight Logistics Industry. Gavin Kelly, the acting chief executive of the Road Freight
Association, said they have appealed to the government to address the matter
with urgency. “Task teams have been engaging with the so-called
‘representatives’ of the ‘aggrieved drivers’, but these either change or
disappear, and then appear elsewhere. “Our union partners have also engaged through the council to
assist with the matter. In many cases, the actions are purely criminal in
intent (looting) and seem to be aimed at destabilising objectives. “If the foreign driver issue was as great as it is portrayed
to be, it would be reasonably easy to solve as both labour and immigration
legislation adequately cover the matter, and have done so for a number of
years. This is not the real issue,” said Kelly. Is Crime Intelligence
failing? Gareth Newham, securities expert at the Institute for
Security Studies (ISS), said that although he cannot state firmly that the
recent spate of truck burnings is an indication that crime intelligence is
failing, the police should be monitoring the hot spots closely because of
historical occurrences. “The police should be able to monitor the involved groups
closely because they know that there is a likelihood of public violence,
property being destroyed and people’s lives being at risk,” he said. “Crime intelligence should be able to know quite quickly who
was involved, who planned the destruction, and where they live.” Newham said the attacks on foreign drivers undermine South
Africa’s image in Africa. “It harms South Africa’s ability to grow the economy and to
create jobs based on trade with other African countries,” he said. Newham said the attacks were likely fuelled by “xenophobic
attitudes”. “Around 30% to 40% of South Africans have xenophobic
attitudes towards other African foreign nationals. “The reason is that there is a myth that people from other
African countries come to South Africa to steal local jobs and commit crimes. “If we shut all the borders and we kick out every foreign
national from Africa in South Africa, we would still have a very high
unemployment rate, high levels of poverty, and a high crime rate because most
of the problems are as a result of systemic and government failures.” Newham said foreigners are also targeted because South
Africans know that in most cases, the police will not take the cases seriously. From the truck
drivers’ point of view All Truck Drivers Foundation (ATDF) chairperson Sipho Zungu
said local truck drivers are pleased that the government is finally doing
something about their plight. “The solutions are there, and we are nearing the point where
we will be able to announce the way forward where the solutions will be
non-violent and non-confrontational or destructive,” he told Weekend Witness. On the violent protests that have occurred across the country,
Zungu said truck drivers are not involved in these. “We have been engaging in peaceful protests to highlight our
plight but what then happened is that people who are not truck drivers did
certain things such as burning the trucks. We don’t know who those people are,”
he said. “The ATDF is not calling for chaos. We have been following
orderly negotiations and are coming up with solutions which we will be able to
announce shortly,” he said. Zungu said unemployed South African drivers feel they are
being sidelined by logistics companies. “We are fighting for local drivers who are sitting at home
unemployed, not to be sidelined. South African drivers should be given first
preference as this is not a scarce skill [that justifies] employers considering
employing foreigners,” he said. Ripple effect on
economy Pietermaritzburg Chamber of Business CEO Melanie Veness said
KZN’s economy is reliant on the logistics sector. “This criminal and destructive behaviour is extremely
damaging to the economy and perpetrators should be dealt with swiftly and
should be made to face the full might of the law,” she said. Veness said arrests are vital at this stage to reduce the
ripple effects the blockade could have on the economy. The spokesperson for KZN Economic Development, Bongani
Tembe, said: “We have not quantified the exact impact in terms of numbers, but
the impact on jobs and the GDP will be huge, hence we are concerned as the provincial
government.” — WWR.