After almost three years of retirement, veteran police
­officer and Pietermaritzburg hero Jack Haskins recently re-entered the world
of search and rescue to help in Mozambique for 10 days following Cyclone Idai. Haskins, a police lieutenant, retired from the police in
2016 following a lengthy career in search and rescue. Haskins now works at the Angel’s Care Crisis Centre for
abused children and women in Howick. He said he was called by Rescue SA who asked if he would
help the team in Mozambique. “The United Nations called on Rescue South Africa who then
made up a team to go help in Mozambique. “We landed in Pemba, Mozambique on April 29. It was raining
quite hard when we arrived but it eased off as the days went on. It was very
hot there. “We spent the night in Pemba, in the airport’s fire station.
They moved all the fire trucks out and we slept on the floor,” said Haskins
with a laugh. “Most of the team knew each other in some way or another and
we all had one thing in common: our passion for wanting to get out there and
help where we could.” He said when they left for Mozambique, they were unsure what
to expect as they had seen rescuers through the news, flying around in
helicopters, trying to save people from the flooding. “From Pemba we went to Ibo Island. Luckily nobody was
seriously injured and no one had died so we didn’t carry out any rescues.” He said the wind had hit the island, doing more damage than
flooding. “There were massive trees that had fallen down on the roads
and people’s houses had collapsed or the roofs had blown off. “There were a few people sitting on the roadside building up
new houses already.” He said they were then split into two teams and were tasked
with clearing the roads to clinics, hospitals and villages. “It got the adrenaline pumping again but it also made me
realise that I am not 20 years old anymore.” Haskins said the group helped erect a “tent town” on the
island and spent a few days digging pit latrines. “The soil was soft but every now and then you would hit some
sort of coral rock with a pick and you could feel the vibrations go right up
your arm.” He said although there were other teams from other
countries, their group was “really the only one on the ground, helping the UN
with all the labour”. “It felt good going out there. We didn’t have to rescue
anyone but I feel we still made a difference to the community. “We were not expecting to spend our time chopping up trees
and clearing roads. We were expecting to be swimming down rivers. “I was not disappointed that there were no rescues. The
community was really appreciative of our help.” Haskins said the situation was not as bad as other disaster
areas in the past and that the last disaster he attended outside South Africa
was in 2003 in Nigeria. “When you are retired and you sit at home, you do miss it.
It is in my blood to go out there and help people. It always has been,” said
Haskins. Haskins on to a
different kind of rescue Haskins started working at the Angel’s Care Crisis Centre in
Howick shortly after his retirement. He has been at the centre for two years as
its manager. “I love it here. The little ones here come from difficult
backgrounds and we are able to help them. I guess it is a different sort of
rescue. Everyone who works here is around to help, but sometimes I think they
help us more.” Haskins is called “Uncle Jack” by the children, and works
with social workers, nurses and police at the centre following abuse cases on
women and children. Walking through the centre, children flocked to Haskins,
grabbing his hand and greeting him with big smiles. I never saw myself wiping
snotty noses,” said Haskins with a laugh.  