An Edendale Hospital nurse was fatally stabbed on her way to work, allegedly by her husband. The alleged killer then shot and wounded one of the woman’s colleagues and his brother. The Health Department issued a statement saying that Nontobeko Kheswa (41) left her Woodlands home with her husband in their family car on Friday morning. He was supposed to drop her off at Edendale Hospital, where she worked. She never arrived there. Her body, in her white uniform, was discovered dumped in a sugarcane field in Otto’s Bluff Road, Claridge, covered in blood. According to her relatives, she had sustained multiple stab wounds, including to her neck. They were too distraught to comment yesterday. The department said that on the same day, the alleged murderer caught up with the nurse’s colleague and his brother driving on a road near the Edendale Mall and fired shots at them. The colleague was shot in the arm and his ear was grazed by a bullet. His brother, who was driving, was also shot and wounded. Both had to receive medical treatment. The suspect fled the scene but was later arrested by police. After being interrogated, he led police to where the nurse’s body had been dumped. KZN Health MEC Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, who is also the chairperson of the KZN Men’s Forum, said the incident was shocking and sad. He has pleaded with women not to stay in abusive relationships. “We are extremely disturbed by the murder of one of our nurses in such a cold-blooded manner. We are always particularly saddened when we lose a healthcare worker through sudden and unexpected death. This nurse leaves behind four children, including a 10-year-old. The prime suspect in her murder is someone who was supposed to be a caregiver, nurturing and protecting her and her children, like a good man should,” he said. “It is extremely painful, and makes you wonder what could have pushed the perpetrator to resort to such a heinous act, which can never be justified. “Unfortunately, we’ve been seeing a lot of incidents of femicide in this department in recent years. It is extremely worrying because it could be a microcosm of our society, an indicator of what women out there are going through.” Dhlomo appealed to women to speak up when they feel unsafe, and to seek support from the courts and police if necessary to get out of an abusive marriage or relationship. Provincial police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele confirmed the murder and said the suspect will appear in court today.