President Cyril Ramaphosa surprised the whole country when
he named the leader of the recently-formed Good party, Patricia De Lille, as
the minister Public Works and Infrastructure on Wednesday evening. Ramaphosa kept to his word of slashing the “bloated” cabinet
from 36 ministers to just 28 by combining departments like Sport with Arts and
Culture, and Agriculture with Land Reform. Some of the expected faces, like Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
Fikile Mbalula and Senzo Mchunu made the cut. Social media users had a field day when embattled former
ministers like Bathabile Dlamini and Faith Muthambi were not appointed to the
cabinet. The ANC was heavily criticised by opposition parties when
the pair appeared on its parliamentary lists despite allegations of corruption
and maladministration they continued to face. Ramaphosa reaffirmed his confidence in Pravin Gordan by
renaming him as the minister of Public Enterprises despite the recent onslaught
against him, not only from the EFF, but also from within the ANC after after a
report by the Public Protector, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, which found that he
violated the Constitution when he approved the early pension payout for former
SA Revenue Service senior official, Ivan Pillay, who was then rehired on a
contract. Pietermaritzburg’s Dr Zweli Mkhize, a medical doctor, will
no longer have to deal with matters of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs as the position was given to Dlamini-Zuma, while he was sent to the
Department of Health. Another local, Blade Nzimande, was sent back to the
Department of Higher Education after holding the transport portfolio since the
2017 cabinet reshuffle. Tito Mboweni stays in the ministry of Finance, Nosiviwe
Mapisa-Nqakula returns to Defence and Military Veterans, Stella Tembisa Ndabeni-Abraham
to Communications, General Bheki Cele stays on as the minister of Police and
Angie Motshekga will continue as the minister of Basic Education — a position
she has held since 2009. Some of the other new faces include Barbara Creecy, who comes
in as the minister of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries, while former
KwaZulu-Natal premier Senzo Mchunu was appointed as the minister for Public
Service and Administration. Lindiwe Sisulu will be responsible for one of the combined
departments: Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation and Nathi Mthethwa will
return to Arts and Culture but Sports has been added to his responsibilities. The super ministry of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural
Development, which has been given to Thoko Didiza, a former land affairs
minister, is perhaps one of the critical portfolios under Ramaphosa’s
administration as the question over land expropriation continues to hang over
his head. Naledi Pandor has been appointed Minister of International
Relations and Co-operation. Aaron Motsoaledi will be going to home affairs, Ronald
Lamola to justice and correctional services, Thulas Nxesi to employment and
labour while Gwede Mantashe has been reappointed to energy. Ramaphosa said he took a number of considerations into
account when he selected his cabinet. Those include experience, continuity, competence as well
generational mix and demographic mix. He said all the ministers and their deputies would be
signing performance agreements after today’s swearing in. “Their performance, individually and collectively, will be
closely monitored against specific outcomes … and where implementation is
unsatisfactory, action will be taken.”