A gardener was ambushed in a residential suburb of Northdale on Thursday morning by three assailants who stabbed him multiple times and robbed him. On Thursday night he was still in hospital but his condition was unknown. The attackers got away. Residents of Kitty Boyd Road in Northdale immediately took to their WhatsApp group, sharing CCTV footage from different houses in the road in a bid to identify the assailants and track them down. Footage from one of the houses, shared on the group showed the man walking near the bottom of a driveway while three men walk towards him. The men disappear behind a bush but one can see a scuffle break out between the attackers and the gardener. When the group emerge from the bush, one can see the three attackers holding onto the man, while one of them appears to stab the helpless man more than once. PAC Security guard Cameron Pillay, who responded to the incident, said the assailants stabbed the man in the back and chest and stole his money and his cellphone before fleeing on foot. “The guy was just outside, cleaning the driveway when those men grabbed him. “When he tried to get away from them, that is when they stabbed him. “He lost a lot of blood. Police were notified of the incident.” Pillay said the community responded very quickly with CCTV footage and pictures of the robbers on the community WhatsApp groups so people would know to look out for them. Pillay said the men were not arrested but that the community was monitoring the street. The man’s employer, who is in the police and asked not to be named for that reason, said the man, known to her only as Stanley, had been working for them for around four years. “He is in casualty in hospital. They have managed to stabilise him but I am not sure what was damaged during the attack,” she said. “My husband is on his way from Johannesburg to come and see him in the hospital,” she added. “We are so shocked and upset by this. Stanley has been with us for a while, he is family. He is the sole bread winner and has two children to look after and provide for. He is only in his 30s. He is young. “We have lots of break-ins and petty theft incidents in our community but this is the first time someone has been attacked.” She said the entire community was “rocked to its core” by the news and the footage. “Stanley had done the same thing for four years, he cleans outside by the driveway and then starts working in the yard. In all those years, nothing ever happened to him.” She said her husband would contact Stanley’s family as soon as he arrived in Pietermaritzburg. Mountain Rise police spokesperson Sean Singh said the operators at 10111 centre did receive a complaint of stabbing at the corner of Kitty Boyd and Rajput Roads. However, he said when the police van arrived no one was found at the scene.