A truck driver was killed after a rock was thrown at his truck while he was driving on the N3, near the Armitage Road turn-off, early on Saturday morning. Muhammed Khan of Automatic Demolishers trucking said his driver Burnard Mbambo, who was 60 years old, lost control of the truck after he was hit by a rock that was thrown from the highway bridge near Liberty Midlands Mall. ER24 spokesperson Ross Campbell said the incident happened just before 5 am on Saturday. He said paramedics found the truck on its side, half in the emergency lane and half down the embankment with the driver entrapped. “Due to the severity of his injuries, by the time the man was extracted from the cab he showed no signs of life and was declared dead on the scene,” said Campbell. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said police were investigating a culpable homicide case and they were not aware that the accident involved rock throwing. Khan said the company was saddened by Mbambo’s death as he was one of their first drivers and has been with the company for over 20 years. “We have lost a good driver and one of our best employees. We will never be able to find someone like him and we hope that something is done about this incident.” Yacoob Dhoda, owner of Yacoob’s Trucking, told The Witness that two of his trucks were damaged by rock throwers in the space of two weeks. Dhoda said one of his trucks was damaged while travelling on the N3 under Dr Chota Motala Road sometime last week at around 10 pm. “Fortunately, the rock missed the windscreen and damaged the roof section,” he said. Two weeks ago, another truck belonging to Dhoda was hit by a rock while driving on the N3 past Hilton towards Pietermaritzburg. No one was injured in either incident. Ebrahim Joosab, of Colt Transport, raised concerns about how truckers were being subjected to criminality while authorities do nothing to protect the truck drivers. “These are hardworking people who spend many days away from their families just so that you can have all those basic food items and luxuries on your plate … yet police and government are not doing anything to find these criminals. “This boulder throwing at Liberty Mall, is being done daily and many trucks have been damaged,” said Joosab.