Police have made breakthrough arrests in the murder of Cramond businessman Farhad Moosa. Seven people, including two relatives, were arrested in an unexpected turn of events on Friday and Saturday night in different locations. An eighth suspect was killed during a dramatic shootout with police. Moosa (46), of Ideal’s Sands, a company that supplies building materials, was shot dead last month while fixing his truck at his smallholding. The incident happened on Old Greytown Road. He was shot on his upper body, while his son, who was with him during the attack, was shot in the hip. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said a collaborative operation between the SAPS Crime Intelligence Unit, Cramond SAPS, Mountain Rise SAPS and RZS Protection led to the arrests. Although she could not divulge any other information, Mbele confirmed that the suspects were arrested in connection with a murder case. While details around the arrests are scant at this stage, well-placed sources said that police swooped on two relatives at around 11 pm on Friday night at their home in the city and bundled them into the back of a car. It is understood that the relatives allegedly devised a plan to kill Moosa and organised a band of four hitmen with the help of two employees. The identity of the relatives is known to The Witness but cannot be revealed until they have appeared in court. That same night, after the relatives were questioned, the two workers were also arrested. The source said after the first phase of the operation, police followed up on more information, which led to another two arrests. More information led to the Eastwood area on Saturday night, where a shootout took place when police tried to intercept the remaining two suspects. The source said that the suspected hitmen’s vehicle was spotted travelling in the Eastwood area on Saturday evening at about 7.30 pm and officers from the Pietermaritzburg Dog Unit began following it. “Noticing that they were being followed, the suspects jumped traffic lights and fled towards Ross Road and a high-speed chase ensued with the suspects opening fire on the pursuing officers.” One of the suspects was shot dead, and his accomplice was treated by paramedics at the scene, before he was taken under police guard to a nearby hospital. No member of the police or public was injured in the shooting. The men in the bakkie were found to be in possession of one firearm. A relative of Moosa’s, who asked to remain unnamed, said the family was “shocked” and “in disbelief” following the string of arrests. “It’s very difficult right now,” said the relative. “At least they have been caught and justice has to be served,” he said. The relative, who was there when the two family members were arrested, said since the murder they had been living in fear. “It’s scary. We’ve been living in fear wondering when the killers will come for us too because we didn’t know what was going on. When you don’t know the motive and the killers haven’t been arrested, you fear for your safety,” he said. He described Moosa as being a very helpful and hardworking businessman who took over his business from his own father as far back as his teenage years. “He loved his wife and his children. He was a really good man. It’s sad that life is so cheap these days. I can’t understand this thing. These people are sick. What has happened to him was so unnecessary,” he added. The suspects are expected to appear in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court today.