Gun-toting robbers prowling Scottsville and Pelham in a car chased and robbed two University of KwaZulu-Natal students in two separate incidents on Monday evening. The first attack occurred at about 6.30 pm on Ridge Road near the university, and the second about 20 minutes later just outside the Oribi Road Clinic. Police have confirmed that the same car, a red older model Toyota Corolla, was involved in both robberies. University of KwaZulu-Natal student Hlelolenkosi Vezi (21) had his ordeal captured on CCTV footage but had not seen the footage by Tuesday afternoon. Vezi said he was walking along Ridge Road towards campus when three men in a red Toyota Corolla stopped next to him. “They were very drunk and were pretending they were lost. When I stepped a little closer to the car, I saw one of the men was holding a gun. “I saw that gun and I just ran for my life,” said Vezi. “They got out of the car and ran after me and took my laptop bag which had everything in it. If I had fought them I would be dead.” Vezi said he was walking to campus that evening to submit an assignment he had been working on for three weeks. “My assignment is gone, so is my laptop. I lost everything.” Vezi said he had managed to get a 48-hour extension on his assignment but that two days’ work could not make up three weeks of work. “I went to open a case at Alexandra Road police station and saw another man walking in. He was badly beaten and said he had also just been robbed by three men.” The CCTV footage shows the Corolla driving down Ridge Road and then stopping. Three men climb out of the vehicle. One of the men is holding a large gun, which police believe to be a rifle. The man then points his rifle at Vezi as Vezi turns and runs, but the men eventually catch up to him and grab his backpack before speeding off in the car. The second student, whose name is known to The Witness but could not be reached for comment yesterday, was near the Oribi Road Clinic when the three men attacked. The student (27) was walking from campus toward the France area when the red Toyota stopped next to him. The men asked for directions before jumping out of the car with their guns and chasing after the man. The student tripped and fell and the attackers caught him and stole his cellphone, wallet and then assaulted him. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said no arrests had been made and he urged students to be vigilant and aware of their surroundings when walking to and from university. “If you are walking in the evening and afternoon, try to walk in groups. Do not walk with your headphones on or your earphones in as this advertises you have a smartphone and makes it difficult for the student to hear any potential attackers approaching.”