A Boughton beekeeper (61) has survived being stung between 80 and 100 times by bees enraged after construction workersbricked up some of his hives to keep the bees from stinging them. Denzil Struckmeyer said his family had lived on the Boughton property where they kept the bees for the past 70 years. “They are big hives because they are quite old,” said Struckmeyer. Speaking to The Witness from his hospital bed on Thursday afternoon, Struckmeyer said there are construction workers on the property next to his. “I think the bees were bothering them. They broke a part of my fence and entered my property and then laid bricks in front of some of the hives.” Struckmeyer said he was unsure how many days the hives had been closed, but guessed it would have been for a day or more. “It has also been quite hot these past few days so the bees must have been highly agitated,” he said. “Yesterday afternoon, I saw the construction workers had made a fire and it was quite close to the hives. “When I got closer to the fire, I noticed the bricks at the hives. I unblocked the first hive, and then the second, and the bees just went for me. “They chased me and five construction workers. I don’t know if the construction workers were stung or not but I screamed to my wife to get the dogs inside because the bees would have killed them. “I am not allergic to bees but I was stung between 80 and 100 times. I did feel my lungs start to constrict and became a bit panicky and that is when I told my wife to call for an ambulance.” Midlands EMS arrived at the property and quickly worked to stabilise Struckmeyer before rushing him to hospital. Midlands EMS’s Mark Winterboer said Struckmeyer was taken to Midlands Medical Centre where he is currently stable but still a “little swollen”. Struckmeyer chuckled as he spoke on the phone, saying he was “not a hospital person” and that he “is ready to go home”. “I am definitely lucky to be alive. “I am still swollen but I know I will be fine.” Despite the scores of bee stings, Struckmeyer said he still found bees to be “fascinating creatures” and would continue to work with them as his family had done for the past 70 years.