A burglar is believed to have sedated two dogs in the Prestbury area before spending over an hour on the property and then fleeing with two bicycles. Prestbury resident Louise Gace said she and her family had left their house on Monday morning and when they arrived home just before 6 pm, they saw the lights were off outside and there were a number of shampoo bottles lying outside. “My husband saw one of the windows and burglar guards had been broken. Then we noticed the bicycles were missing.” She said the family had a German Shepherd and a Staffie. After watching CCTV footage from outside their yard they saw that their two dogs had been asleep the entire time the burglar was on the property. She said she thought the dogs may have been sedated because “when we got home their ears were down and their tails were between their legs”.  CCTV footage of an intruder entering a property owned by Craig and Louise Gace of Prestbury on Monday morning. She said the footage showed they had been asleep for almost an hour. Chase Valley vet Dr Estee van Aardt said that it was not common for burglars to get hold of proper sedatives for dogs but said other mixtures were sometimes used to make them sleep but not necessarily to kill them. Some people use cough mixture or cattle dip. They do not always mean to kill the dog but it can be fatal, especially for smaller animals. She said pets that had been sedated this way would usually be fine but that pet owners needed to be aware of their pets’ behaviour. “People try and give their dogs activated charcoal to offset the sedative or poison but this can sometimes do more harm than good.” She said this was because dogs could not always swallow after being poisoned or sedated. “If they are bright and alert then activated charcoal works great.” She said Hilton Veterinary Hospital and Veterinary House Hospital in Prince Alfred Street were the only 24-hour emergency vets in Pietermaritzburg. Another Prestbury resident, Candy Rossouw, said there had been four incidents of dogs being sedated in the area over the past four months. “A month ago, one of the community members had their dog poisoned. It appears that this is happening a little too often for comfort,” she said. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese, however, said if the Gaces’ dogs were sedated, it was an isolated incident.