On Tuesday afternoon, I received some bad news. I was
scanning through The Witness classifieds when I came across a death notice, out
of the blue, for a contact I had worked with for many years. I had chatted to him via WhatsApp and e-mail just a month
ago and I had no idea he was so ill. News of John Campbell’s death hit me quite hard. I’m a jaded
old news hack, and contacts come and contacts go, but there was something
special about John. We got to know each other because over the years I had done
news stories about his very important work with Working on Fire and the Lion’s
River Fire Protection Association. He had willingly helped on many occasions with good
information, rainfall stats and other snippets of news, and I can’t remember
how it happened, but while we were chatting one day, I let him into a family
joke. Each year on the Ides of March (March 15), the day Julius
Caesar’s senators did one on him, my sisters and I have a competition to be the
first to SMS and then more lately to WhatsApp each other the words “Beware the
Ides of March”, sometimes in Latin too. We pretend to be really superstitious about the day. It’s a
silly family tradition, but with most of us having studied Latin at some point,
it became a ritual. And, we take it all fairly seriously, the five of us.
Anyway, one year John and I were chatting about something or other and one of
us mentioned the Ides of March. I told him of the tradition and complained that
my one sister kept pipping me to the post with the warning each year, very,
very early in the morning on March 15. That must have been a good 10 years ago. And, every year
since without me asking him to, John has sent me a reminder on or before March
14 to set my alarm to send the text and beat my sisters. I always let him know
the outcome, which of us had won. When I won, he rejoiced. When I lost, he commiserated. He
became part of the fun of it all. And if I hadn’t heard from him for a while, I
would send him a text or e-mail and he would reply. We would grumble a bit about our health or the weather or
whatever to each other at times, but he was always, always upbeat, with a joke
or quip that made me laugh. In our latest Ides of March exchange this year, he WhatsApped
on the morning of March 14: “Tomorrow IDES OF MARCH. Time to set your alarm for
tomorrow morning to keep your winning streak running. (Smiley face and red
exclamation mark emojis.)” I thanked him in my reply and warned him to beware the Ides
himself. But, alas, one of my sisters sent the first message at 5.04 am. I was still fast asleep and hadn’t won. I felt so bad
telling John because I almost felt like I’d let him down. But his reply back
made me giggle. “Dammit, send her a box of sleeping pills next year!” John was one of those constants in my career. If there were
fire stories John was often the go-to man for the Witness reporters and I. I did a great feature on him in 2008. You see, besides being
a font of fire knowledge, John was also a very interesting fellow. He was a
water diviner and a flood predictor. He also dabbled in predicting fires. When we finally met for the story I did on him, on a field
near Darvill, he showed me his skills. I wrote that his divining rod made from two six-millimetre nylon
rods, a piece of gas pipe and a glob of Pratley’s putty, were combined to form
the mystical tool which guided him somehow to where the underground water was. In a touching tribute, Bobby Hoole, fire protection officer
of the Lion’s River Fire Protection Association, wrote that John had
volunteered there as chairperson since 2006. He had been active in the Midlands fire fraternity for the
past 33 years, having been directly involved in the area since 1985, initially
with Natal Midlands Fire Protection Association (NMFPA) and in 1991 as
chairperson of Lions River District Fire Control Area. John’s spirit of volunteerism was great, and I will miss
him, especially around  the Ides of March
each year. Rest peacefully John and thanks for all the help, with all the
stories and especially, the Ides. Lastly, I also want to pay tribute to local snake catcher
Zane Barnard who died this week in a car crash. Zane was also generous with his help to our reporters and we
will miss him as a font of knowledge and someone who was, like John, so very
passionate about what he did. It’s good to remember these men. Let’s do it often. But now it’s time to go out and grab life
by the horns and enjoy your weekend! You’ve earned it.