Local schoolboy and Rubik’s Cube enthusiast Waseem Hoosain came out trumps at the KZN Cube Comp held in Salt Rock, near Ballito, on the weekend. Waseem on average completed a completely scrambled Rubik’s Cube in an impressive 14,04 seconds at the main event — with his best time being 11,68 seconds. The Alexandra High School matriculant also came second in a one-handed event and came third in an event with a bigger cube. Waseem told The Witness he was ecstatic with his performance, especially after being so nervous that his hands were shaking on the day. “The cube gets scrambled and you don’t know what you’ll have to work with. Then you get just 15 seconds to assess the cube and decide what you’re going to do.” For the final competition, contestants had to finish a cube five times and their times were averaged. “I finished one in 15 seconds, then 14, then 12, then when I made 11 seconds I felt really good. “After the event, I sat in the waiting area refreshing my phone to see when they would update the results. When I saw I came first I was jumping for joy and shouting,” he said. The secret to his incredible speed is memorising complex algorithms which provide a blueprint on what to do depending on the pattern on the scrambled cube.  Waseem said he must have memorised more than 100 of them, mainly using YouTube tutorials. “I practise whenever I’m free, like if I have no homework, or when I’m waiting to be fetched from school. I practise about four hours a day.” He said he got interested in Rubik’s Cubes in primary school when his cousin showed him how to complete one. He said he began learning about it on YouTube but wasn’t able to solve them quickly for a few years until he bought better quality cubes. “I then went from doing it under one minute, then under 40 seconds, then 30 seconds, then I was consistently finishing below 20 seconds.” His goal is to break the 10-seconds mark, then go for the South African record, which is eight seconds flat. He also wants to compete in other tournaments in future. “I would encourage others to get into this because it really helps you take your mind off things and you just let go.” Waseem wants to study software engineering after matric.