A 13-year-old boy has described being allegedly sexually molested several times when he stayed at the home of and slept in the same bed as former school guidance counsellor Darren Goddard. The boy, who would stay with Goddard for weeks at a time between 2013 and 2016 when he attended the school that Goddard worked at, alleged Goddard often molested him, apparently when he thought the boy was asleep. The boy is the last of eight boys who are complainants in the case where Goddard faces 15 counts in total — one of accessing child pornography, being in possession of child pornography, and the rest of sexual assault and rape. Goddard, who is on trial in the Pietermaritzburg high court, pleaded not guilty to all charges. The boy alleged Goddard had raped him on two occasions, and on another performed a sex act on him. He also alleged Goddard would kiss him on the lips and cheek when he dropped him back at his parents’ home. The boy testified he never said anything to Goddard because he was “scared he was going to do something to me, maybe hit me or beat me or even kill me”. He said he began being counselled by Goddard in 2011 after being bullied at a different school. When it later came to light that Goddard’s and the boy’s families knew each other, he began staying with Goddard. He testified that the counsellor had showered him with gifts, including toys, three bicycles — one of which cost about R20 000 — two guns and an Xbox. The boy had first stayed with Goddard in his flat in Chase Valley, but the alleged abuse began when Goddard moved to a farmhouse in Otto’s Bluff. He said they slept in the same bed in Goddard’s room because he was afraid of the dark. He alleged Goddard would wait about 30 minutes after they had gone to bed to make sure the boy was asleep, then adjust his sleeping position and molest him. The boy said he was not asleep during these incidents, but was too afraid to confront Goddard about it, saying the alleged incidents left him “feeling sore”. He alleged the abuse continued when Goddard moved to another farmhouse “about one kilometre away” from the first one. State prosecutor Attie Truter later read handwritten letters the boy and Goddard allegedly exchanged when the counsellor was detained awaiting bail, where he would affectionately refer to the boy as “minion” and in one wrote: “I love you to the ends of the world and back.” The boy told the court he considered Goddard a father figure. The trial continues today, when Goddard’s advocate, Shane Matthews, is expected to cross-examine the boy.