A local dog owner says an animal psychic was able to help find her missing dog. Michelle Amiss, from Boughton, told The Witness that her four-year-old pitbull, Lily, went missing on May 7. She said that through the help of “animal communicator” Kim Tully, they found the dog 10 days later, stuck in a bush near the forest not far from her home. Amiss, who has four other dogs, said Lily and one of her other dogs, Luis, had escaped from her yard through a hole they dug under the fence. “Luis returned the next day without Lily and I realised something had happened to her,” said Amiss. She said, with the help of her friend Nicole Spangenberg and her family, they began to search the neighbourhood, including the thick forest that borders Boughton and Prestbury. After several fruitless searches, Amiss contacted the Hillcrest animal communicator, Tully, after she heard stories about how Tully had helped locate many other missing pets in the Durban area. Tully asked Amiss to send her a picture of Lily, with her eyes visible, so she could “channel through Lily’s eyes” and find her location. Spangenberg, Amiss’ friend, said Tully “literally tapped into Lily and saw what Lily saw”. “Kim got back to us saying Lily was alive but couldn’t get home because she was stuck. She said she saw broken sticks, a lot of wire, and she was looking up at a slope. She said Lily was near water but couldn’t reach it and she could hear the train.” With the clear description of the area Lily was stuck in, Amiss once again went searching for her dog. “I was standing outside on Friday night around nine or 10 pm when I heard Lily’s very distinctive bark from the distance. Luis [her other dog] was standing next to me and I saw by his reaction that the bark was definitely Lily’s,” said Amiss. Spangenberg said they found Lily at around 11 pm in the bush just below the forest. “We had to cut through the thick bush and could hear faint whimpers as we went. Eventually we saw eyes shine and Josh [Spangenberg’s 11-year-old son] had to crawl on his hands and knees and there she was, on a slope, tangled up in welded mesh and a big concrete slab. She was close to the stream but not able to reach it and we could hear the train track in the distance. “Lily was exhausted but could still walk. To say she was happy to see Michelle is an understatement,” said Spangenberg. Speaking to The Witness, Tully described animal communication as a silent, telepathic language that functions via deepened intuition and energy. “It’s an actual exchange of information between the communicator and animal in the form of words, mental images, feelings and more,” she said.  Animal communicator Kim Tully with her dog Brodie. In locating Lily, Tully said she was assisted by Mary Carey, an animal specialised kinesiologist and iridologist. She said they were happy that they could help reunite Lily with her family. Spangenberg said she knows the anguish of losing a pet and advised pet owners to explore all options before giving up. “The point of us sharing this is to give hope to others searching. Don’t give up and believe the universe is much greater than we choose to comprehend and our spiritual connection to our animals’ souls is strong ... [Kim Tully] never wavered, she kept saying to me Lily is there and she is alive, and she wants to come home,” she said. Frankie is still missing Frankie, the missing Hilton Rottweiler, has still not been found. The dog went missing on April 12. Despite the owners, Josh Trenam and his wife Tyler, having offered a R20 000 reward for the safe return of their beloved Rottweiler, the dog is still missing. Speaking to The Witness on Wednesday, Josh said they were still actively looking for Frankie. “We have just put out a few more ads in several local newspapers and are following up on leads when people call but we haven’t found him,” he said. Following the story of the animal psychic tracing Lily, Josh said it was not something he and his wife would consider. “It does make it a little harder because we saw that that other woman was able to find her dog but it’s not something we would do. It’s not our belief. We feel that God will bring Frankie back to us at the right time,” said Josh. He appealed to anyone with any information on their dog’s whereabouts to contact them at 076 784 7681 or 074 171 8592.  Missing dog Frankie. 