A devastated Howick woman says she had to pay about R11 000 for medical expenses after her cat, Drogo, was shot with an air rifle in her garden. Jo-Anne Gilbert, from Essex Road, told The Witness that three-and-a-half-year-old Drogo had been shot twice in the last five months since they moved into the neighbourhood in April. In May, Drogo was shot with a pellet gun, but the pellet hit his ribcage and did not penetrate his body. Two weeks ago, Drogo was shot again in the abdomen. He underwent extensive surgery and had 10 cm of his intestines removed. “There were six holes that the pellet actually caused in the intestines. They did an extensive operation and had to remove his intestines.” “On October 11 I realised Drogo was missing, which is unusual for him because he is a home cat and rarely goes out exploring.” Gilbert said that when she went to look for him in the morning, she spotted him lying in the bush in agony. Gilbert said she took Drogo to a vet, who did x-rays and found that the cat had been severely wounded by a pellet. “It took quite a while for him to recover. He wasn’t eating but thank goodness every day he’s getting stronger and eating a bit more. “Drogo came to me in 2018. We took him in after his previous owner moved to a farm. We thought we’d keep him, and that he’d be safer with us than on a farm. The previous owner is also outraged, she has come to visit him.” Gilbert said that after the second shooting she had sent a message on the community chat group to address the issue. “There are a few people that have pellet guns in the area, and it is shocking that people think they can just shoot at animals.” She said in July, shots fired at monkeys came through her yard. Gilbert has opened a case of animal cruelty with the police. “We have no proof who was responsible. However, one woman phoned me on Friday and said that her neighbour had said if he finds a cat in his yard, he is going to shoot it. I have asked the woman to go to the police with that information.” “It’s somebody in the neighbourhood but we can’t say with absolute certainty who it is,” she said.