An eight-year-old girl is suffering from recurring nightmares after she was raped at school, allegedly by a pupil from a nearby special school. The girl from Highflats in Ixopo, who cannot be named to protect her identity, was raped a week ago at the Malezulu Primary School. It is believed that she was raped by a special needs boy aged 16. Malezulu Primary School declined to comment and referred all questions to the provincial Education Department. KZN Education Department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said they were not aware of the incident. Mahlambi implored the parents to open a case with the police. “The department will also do its investigation,” he said. The mother said the incident happened as her daughter was about to leave school. “She said she went to fetch her school bag from her classroom when she was accosted by two boys who dragged her behind one of the unoccupied classrooms at the school and one of them raped her.” The boys stay at a temporary boarding facility at Malezulu Primary School. A source at the school said pupils from the special needs school were being accommodated at Malezulu Primary School pending the completion of their boarding facility. On Thursday, irate parents and residents of Mhlabasane area protested outside the school gate calling for the arrest of the two boys. Police had to be called to the school to disperse the angry crowd. The mother said she suspected something was amiss when her daughter did not want to go to school and complained about being sick. “When she came from school on Thursday I could see that she was not okay. I asked what happened and she told me that she had a headache. On Friday when she came back from school, she was still tired. I thought maybe she had the flu.” On Tuesday, she said she had noticed that her daughter was still not her usual self and decided to ask her what was wrong. “I asked what happened and that is when she started crying and told me that two boys had dragged her behind the classrooms where they undressed her and one of them raped her. “She said one of the boys pinned her to the ground and blocked her mouth so she could not scream,” the mother said. The mother said she was horrified when she examined her daughter with a relative. “I was shocked and horrified. I was on the floor when my senses returned to me. I couldn’t believe what I was seeing. I asked my daughter what happened, and she told me that a boy had sexual intercourse with her.” She said she took her daughter back to school on Wednesday to report the incident and then went to the local clinic where it was confirmed that the child had been raped. “She doesn’t want to go back to school. I’m also scared to send her back … what if this happens again. I thought she was safe at school,” said the mother. The girl’s father said: “I can’t understand how there is no supervision. This incident shows negligence on the side of the school. Children should be supervised at all times. “My child is traumatised and she is scarred for life,” said the father.