 A
woman claiming to do the right thing to protect her three-year-old daughter is
facing a criminal charge as a consequence. She
appeared briefly before magistrate Ashleigh Jennings in the Pietermaritzburg
District Court on Tuesday, charged with contempt of court. It
is alleged that last month she went against a court order by not allowing the
father of her daughter access to the child from Friday afternoon until Sunday
afternoon. She
was arrested on September 10, and released on R500 bail. Prosecutor
Bruce Mkhwanazi told the court on Tuesday that the Director of Public
Prosecutions is deciding what to do about the case in the wake of allegations
of sexual molestation levelled by the woman against the man. Her
attorney Carlos Miranda said that the allegations are being investigated by the
Independent Police Investigative Directorate. He
said that the matter has been referred to the DPP for a decision and not a
senior prosecutor because the man is a police officer. In addition, he added
that he has issued a notice of appeal against the maintenance court’s decision
allowing the man access to the child. The
woman is livid. She told The Witness that all she wants to do
is protect her daughter but the justice system is standing in her way. She said
that the man was given access rights to the child, despite the court having
been provided with a social worker’s report from The Child and Family Welfare
Society of Pietermaritzburg. The
report is dated March 29. It
said that the mother approached the society regarding the care of the child
while in the care of the father. “The
natural mother is alleging that the natural father has been touching the child
concerned in an inappropriate manner. The child concerned has disclosed this to
her after the natural father had access to the child over the weekend. The
natural mother is seeking help as she has tried keeping the child concerned
away from the natural father, after the child had allegedly been molested by
him, but was arrested for violating the court order,” it said. The
report added that the social worker has interviewed the child concerned and she
alleged that the father hits her on her arms and her body. “She
has further stated that he touched her vagina with his fingers and also her
buttocks. She has stated that she does not want to have contact with the
natural father”. The
father on Tuesday rubbished the allegations, saying the woman has been trying
to keep the child away from him for three years. He alleged that woman is being
influenced by her mother. “They
want to get me out of the picture so that they can collect foster grant as they
are doing for the woman’s older child who she has with another man.” He
said that he is paying maintenance for his daughter, which the woman is
“happily” accepting.  