With unemployment levels at an all-time high, any advertisement for a position of any kind attracts thousands of applications from those desperately seeking work. On Wednesday, a Pietermaritzburg woman who is currently looking for work reported how she narrowly missed falling victim to an online scam preying on jobseekers. The 45-year-old woman from Blackridge said she was almost fleeced out of R5 000 by a man known as “Thabo Mkgotha”, who was operating under the pretence that he was a recruitment official at Grey’s Hospital. In a desperate bid to find a job, the woman, who asked to remain unnamed, told how she saw a job advert on Gigajob, while skimming online for employment opportunities. She immediately sent her CV to Mkgotha, who then responded and sent the woman a z83 official government application form. The job posting, which has been seen by The Witness, was scouting for nurses, security guards, paramedics and general workers. “He sent me the form to complete and attach my CV and send back. I did that and then I got another call from the person asking me to give them a call.” She did so and said that “Mkgotha” said they had already shortlisted candidates for the position she had applied for. “He said he was going to speak to his manager and see if they can’t slip me in because I have a good CV.” Convinced that she stood a chance, the woman said she called “Mkgotha” back. He said his manager had said they could squeeze her in but she would have to pay R5 000. The woman told The Witness that she knew immediately that it was a scam. “He said they had to do a registration process and then he also confirmed an interview appointment for Friday at Grey’s Hospital. The moment he said R5 000 I called Grey’s and they told me it was a scam.” The advertisement was posted on the website on Tuesday. “The post has been viewed so many times, how many people has this guy taken advantage of? Desperate people go and borrow the money so they can get a job, and nothing happens. “This is a legitimate job search site, and this guy is just taking advantage of it. The advert looks legit and a lot of people can get caught up in it. It’s a big net that he’s thrown with the jobs he’s listed on the advert.” The woman, who has been unemployed for over a month, said she would open a case with the police. She said she told “Mkgotha” that she would only have the money on Friday. “I told him I had spoken to my mother and my brother and they can only give me the money on Friday afternoon. He agreed and after he did so, he asked her how much money she had available to pay immediately. “He tried to get whatever he could. What worries me is how many desperate people he is going to take advantage of.” Grey’s Hospital did not respond to a media query sent by The Witness on Wednesday. 