Two Howick residents have launched a manhunt for a person shooting pets with an air rifle. Dr Simon Dommett, of the Howick Small Animal Veterinary Clinic, confirmed that he had operated on two pets shot with air rifles living about three blocks away from each other in Howick. In the first incident, a cat was wounded in the abdomen, while last Thursday an 18-year-old Jack Russell, Bubbles, from Buchanan Street was shot in the shoulder. A heartbroken Barbra Dommett, Bubbles’ owner and the mother of the vet, said she found the little dog, who weighs five kilograms, wounded in the shoulder when she got home on Thursday. She told The Witness she wants answers as to who shot her and why. “We rushed her to the vet, assuming she had walked into a branch. She’s an old lady and has severe dementia and her eyesight and hearing isn’t good,” she said. After two veterinary clinic visits Dommett said she was horrified to learn from the vet that the injury was in fact from a pellet gun. “On Thursday the vet said the wound looked superficial and he gave her pain medication,” she said. “This morning [Friday] she still wasn’t well. I took her back to the doctor and he did X-rays and found that she had been shot. “As far as I am aware, it is still a crime to fire a pellet gun in a suburban area, not to mention that it is a crime to intentionally harm or kill an animal. “I don’t understand why anybody would do that to a harmless little old dog. It’s atrocious. I “ live in a quiet neighbourhood and I don’t know why anybody would want to harm a gentle dog like Bubbles.” Dommett said she intends opening a case of animal cruelty with the police. “We have no proof who was responsible, although we have a lead.” she said. “I will be opening a case of animal cruelty with the police. “I have been told the owners of the cat have also reported the incident to SAPS. People must realise that it is not acceptable to shoot animals.” Explaining the severity of the wounds to both animals, Dr Dommett said: “The cat was badly injured, and the pellet caused major damage to its intestines. “We had to do extensive surgery and the it had to have about 10 centimetres of intestines removed but it does seem to be doing very well at the moment.” He said fortunately, Bubbles’ wound wasn’t too dangerous although he administered an anaesthetic for the 18-year-old dog. “We had to remove the bullet and she is also recovering well.”