Former school guidance counsellor Darren Goddard is alleging that someone else downloaded 2 785 pornographic images of young boys onto his laptop. On Thursday, Captain Sunette Potgieter testified before Pietermaritzburg high court Judge Kate Pillay about images that were found on Goddard’s laptop. He faces 15 counts in total — one of accessing child pornography, being in possession of child pornography, and the rest of sexual assault and rape. Potgieter told the court how information is created when photos are taken, for instance the time and date, and how more information gets created when the image is downloaded onto a computer. The images found on Goddard’s laptop date back to 2007. Although Potgieter could not say with certainty where the photos came from, it was her opinion that they were “most probably downloaded from the Internet”. Goddard’s advocate, Shane Matthews, is suggesting they were downloaded from a disk. Potgieter said Goddard’s user profile on the laptop was accessed between July 25 and August 4, 2016. She said on July 27, there were six failed attempts to log into Goddard’s profile. On August 1, there were seven failed log-in attempts. Three days later there were 18 failed attempts, and two successful attempts when the user logged in and then off and on again for 15 minutes. Goddard was in custody at the time having been arrested in this matter. Matthews said that the court has heard evidence that a police officer received the laptop on August 3 and was given a password to log into Goddard’s profile. She logged in successfully. She then turned the laptop off and put it into her safe until August 8. Potieger said that one can’t manually change the date and times of more than 2 000 photos in 15 minutes. Under cross-examination she said that the date and time on a computer can be changed, which means that when the downloading took place, the date and time could have been manually set on the computer to whatever the user wanted. For instance, even though a photo was downloaded on say October 24, 2019, if the computer date and time was changed to June 3, 2007, and the dates are changed again afterwards to the correct date, the image would show the date as June 3, 2007. The court was shown 15 images of naked young boys found on the laptop. State advocate Attie Truter told Potgieter to go into the details of one of the photographs. She said the image was downloaded on the laptop on December 16, 2007 and last accessed on May 9, 2011. She said this picture was downloaded onto the system on its own, not in bulk. The case has been adjourned to Monday.