A man who killed his four children recently said he did so because he believed his wife was unfaithful and was divorcing him to be with the father of her first child. Sbusiso Mpungose (44) on Wednesday pleaded guilty in the Pietermaritzburg high court to killing Kuhlekonke (4), Khwezi (6), Siphesihle (10) and his step-daughter Ayakha Jiyane (17). The murders happened on September 3, in Wyebank, Pinetown. He told the court that he met his wife Xolisile Mpungose in 2008, fell in love, and in 2011 they got married. He knew that she had a child with another man, Vusi Jiyane. He and his wife had a cordial relationship and they resolved problems without getting the children involved, said Mpungose. He said that in May one of his children came to him with his wife’s phone and he saw a photo of the eldest child with her father, Jiyane. His wife had told him previously that she was not communicating with Jiyane because he was not contributing towards maintenance. He said he asked his wife about the photo and she told him it was taken in December when the child visited her father and that she was keeping it safe. In June he saw the same photo on her WhatsApp contacts, saved under the name Bizo. He became curious and read her messages. “It became apparent that these two were in a love relationship as there were love hearts and blown kisses exchanged with the two in the messages,” he said. When his wife came into the house, she sensed something was wrong and deleted the messages. He added that he confronted her about the messages that night and at first she accused him of invading her privacy. She then said the messages were sent by her daughter to her father and had nothing to do with her. She said he should ask Jiyane about the messages and not her. Regarding the calls between them, she said they were communicating because Jiyane was responsible for the child’s “education to become a teacher”. “This made me very angry because, in my mind, it confirmed my wife’s infidelity,” said Mpungose. He called Jiyane, who denied speaking to his wife or having an affair with her. “I was shattered and felt betrayed by my wife,” he said, adding he later received confirmation she was having an affair. He said he felt betrayed and depressed and his wife still continued denying she was having an affair. They then started sleeping in different rooms. In August she suggested they get divorced and he eventually agreed. A few days afterwards they got into a fight and she said she had had enough of him. “This left me devastated. I concluded she was leaving me for Jiyane,” he said. Mpungose said he then decided to end his and his children’s lives. He hired a taxi and fetched his biological children from their respective schools. He took them home and killed them. He then went to the eldest child’s school and they both boarded a taxi. He told her when to get out and when they did he took her to a secluded spot and strangled her. He bought alcohol so that he could get drunk and jump off a bridge. Mpungose was arrested the next day.