Alleged paedophile Darren Goddard’s laptop accessed a proxy server of the University of KwaZulu-Natal to get onto pornographic sites in December 2010. This was the evidence given in the Pietermaritzburg high court on Tuesday by Captain Sunette Potgieter. She was testifying about pornographic images of young boys found on Goddard’s laptop. He faces 15 counts in total — one of accessing child pornography, being in possession of child pornography, and the rest of sexual assault and rape. Goddard has pleaded not guilty to all of the charges. He is claiming that someone else downloaded all the images from a disk onto his laptop, and changed the dates so that it would seem they were downloaded on the laptop years before. Potgieter said that there are up to 30 images that have the same date and time. She said that it would be “very labour intensive” for someone to download all the images found on the laptop and manually change the date and time in 15 minutes. Last week Potgieter told Judge Kate Pillay that Goddard’s user profile on the laptop was accessed between July 25 and August 4, 2016. On July 27, there were six failed attempts to log into Goddard’s profile. On August 1, there were seven failed log-in attempts. Three days later there were 18 failed attempts, and two successful attempts were the user logged on and off and on again for 15 minutes. During this time Goddard was in custody having been arrested in this matter. On Tuesday, Makhosazane Khumalo, of the information and communications services at the university, told the court that Goddard was a staff member at the university from January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2010. While she did not say what he was employed as, he fell under the College of Humanities. She said that every staff member is issued with an e-mail address. One needs a username and a password to gain access to the Internet, she said. Khumalo added that once a staff member leaves UKZN, he or she can’t get access to the Internet using a UKZN log-in. Goddard’s advocate, Shane Matthews, did not ask any questions. He said he only found out about the evidence recently and did not have enough time to consult with his own experts. He said that should he have any questions at a later stage, he will recall these two witnesses, which state advocate Attie Truter has agreed to. He closed the state’s case on Tuesday. The trial has been adjourned to May next year.