The blood found on the shoes of a University of KwaZulu-Natal student is believed to be that of a candidate attorney who was shot recently. Sergeant Victus Ngcobo on Wednesday told the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court in an affidavit that it has been sent for testing. He is opposed to bail being granted to Kwanda Ncala, a third year Governance, Business and Ethics student, and his alleged accomplice, who is a 17-year-old Grade 11 pupil. The two are alleged to have killed candidate attorney Mluleki Msomi (24) on September 13, outside the pub Saki at Victoria Centre. They also robbed him of his white Hilux double cab. Ngcobo said the evidence is that at about 1 am, the men were at the centre with another friend when they met Msomi. Ncala then shot Msomi, who died at the scene. He drove off in Msomi’s vehicle along with the teenager and their friend. At about 2.30 am, SAPS dog unit members found the vehicle abandoned in Milner Road, Scottsville, close to the university. It is believed that the firearm used was stolen by the teenager from his grandfather. Ngcobo added the murder is serious because it is believed to have been premeditated. This is a “priority crime case”, members of the public are outraged and it has drawn widespread attention, he said. Ncala said in his affidavit that he will be pleading not guilty at his trial. The teenager said the same. However, he has placed himself at the scene. The youngster, “I saw accused one [Ncala] and the deceased converse to one another as if they were acquaintances. I later found out that the deceased was a candidate attorney and I was aware accused one was a law student. “I went to talk to other people a distance away. At some stage accused one called me. I was informed to get into a vehicle. At that stage I was curious as to why we were going back in a different vehicle than the one we arrived in. “Before I could ask, I saw blood in the vehicle and then realised that there was a problem, but was too scared to ask.” He said he decided to discuss the matter with his mother but before he got the opportunity to speak to her he was arrested. He explained that he did not live in the same house as his mother. Both men said they are not flight risks and will not evade trial. Judgment on whether they should get bail has been adjourned to next week.