Shocked members of the Eastwood community gathered around paramedics and police outside the local high school on Tuesday where a pupil was stabbed six times during a horror attack on the eve of matric exams. The 18-year-old Grade 11 pupil, Hershel Fynn, died at the scene. Three other boys were also hospitalised yesterday. One was Fynn’s friend who was also stabbed in the incident. The two had been set upon by six boys outside the school in what some believe was a “gang-related” attack. The attack then also inspired other skirmishes in the area, and another two boys were hospitalised as a result. Their conditions were not known at the time of going to press. Police sources told The Witness at the scene that Fynn was allegedly attacked after confronting a group of boys in the school who had stabbed a girl pupil at school on Monday with a pair of scissors. This happened during “bombing” rituals at the school, where matriculants pelt other students with eggs and water around exam time. Sources also claimed that pupils had kicked teachers’ cars on Tuesday. The school appeared to be empty when The Witness arrived on scene shortly after the stabbing late on Tuesday afternoon. The assailants had run away from the area. Similar incidents of violence have sent shockwaves through the school community, which fears the latest stabbing will lead to other attacks in retaliation. On Wednesday morning the school will be monitored by police. Pupils who are expected to write matric exams, which begin with computer studies on Wednesday, will meet at a local church and be escorted by police into school. Shocked members of the community lined the street outside the school as police and ambulance services combed the area. Community members gasped audibly as police exposed Fynn’s bloody body to take photos of his wounds.  Sources at the scene said Fynn sustained two stab wounds to his left side, one to the chest and back, and two to his abdomen. Robin Davie, operations manager of Superior Security, which is based at the school, said there had been tensions at the school since Monday. “After the bombing and the girl was stabbed, these two boys [Fynn and his friend] confronted the other boys and the boys told them ‘we’ll settle this outside school’.” He said Fynn and his friend left the school gates alone and the group was waiting for them around 2.30 pm on Tuesday. He said the attackers had likely carried knives with them to school on Tuesday. Roy Ram, the school’s governing body chairperson, said: “It’s very scary and the violence has never been this bad. We are shocked and angry about what happened. It’s very sad and we’ve never had a student war like this where they wanted to kill each other. It’s out of order.” A family member at the scene, who lives right outside the school, said Fynn died in her arms. “I came outside and I held him. People said he had been stabbed. I saw him take his last breath and I saw his eyes roll back. He couldn’t say anything. I tried to wake him up.” She described Fynn as a humble and obedient person who had dreams of being a lawyer. Police spokesperson Warrant Officer Maistry said police were investigating a case of murder and attempted murder. No arrests had been made by Wednesday evening. She called on community members to contact Mountain Rise police about crime awareness at Eastwood Secondary. Muzi Mahlambi, spokesperson for the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education, called on parents to take seriously children who report acts of bullying. He said the department was shocked by the incident. Anyone with information about the attacks can contact Captain Moula on 071 365 0210. 